# Introduction to Model View Controller

The Model View Controller pattern of structuring applications (MVC) is so common because it satisfies the basic needs of almost all applications. The need to access and move data, the need to display that data, and the need to allow users to interact with or change that data. This structure divides the application into three distinct parts, the Model, the View and the Controller.

## The Model

This is the data storage and classes that represent the data. Often the data for an application is not stored within the app anywhere, but rather in a separate file or on a database, but once that data gets into the application, it needs to move around the application

## The View

The view comprises the classes that are responsible for displaying what the user sees. This could be React components, HTML or any other language that is presenting user interface.

## The Controller

The controller component is exactly what it sounds like: this is where the model and the view are controlled. In a MVC app, the logic will all mostly live in this controller rather than in the view and the model. The controller will listen for events and interact with the model and update the data displayed to the view. It fires requests to the model and handles the responses as well.

## Benefits and Disadvantages of MVC

In general, MVC is in line with separation of concerns, but if you get carried away with this, then the complexity of the application will grow. Complexity should be something born of necessity: this is a complex problem. For a simple application, it may not be necessary to divide everything down into these components.

But, for a larger scale application, this could be a great thing. Since different views can be populated by the same controller, UI updates can be made easier and the whole application can be communicated across a team more easily. If the application takes a team to maintain, then it's a good sign that there is enough complexity to implement the MVC model.

