# Preventing SQL Injection Attacks

## Input Sanitation and Validator.js

One way that we can prevent SQL Injections is to sanitize our inputs, or remove any malicious code before it is added to the database.

validator.js is a library of string validators that has an express wrapper - `express-validator` that can help us do this.

## Validating Forms

Validation is different from sanitation in that the data is checked to see if it adheres to a certain format.

Here are some methods of validation that are available in the `validator` module:

- `isEmail()`
- `isLength()`
- `isNumeric()`
- `contains()`
- `isBoolean()`
- `isCurrency()`
- `isJSON()`
- `isMobilePhone()`
- `isPostalCode()`
- `isBefore()` and `isAfter()` for dates

So to validate a form that has been parsed into the request body

```javascript
app.post('/submit', (req, res) => {
  console.log( validator.isEmail(req.body.email) )
})
```

## Data Sanitation

Sanitation will allow us to remove improper formatting or potentially malicious code from an input. Validator can also help us do this.

One function is `validator.normalizeEmail()` which removes all formatting.

Another is `validator.escape()` to replace `<` , `>` , `&` , `’` , and `”` characters that could create HTML entities.

```javascript
// Normalize Email
console.log( validator.normalizeEmail("       STUDENT@Codecademy.com"))
  // Logs: student@codecademy.com

// Escape
console.log( validator.excape("1 < 2") )
  // Logs: 1 &lt; 2
```

All available sanitation functions:

[npm: validator](https://www.npmjs.com/package/validator)

## Prepared Statements: Placeholders

One of the best ways to protect against SQL Injection is to use prepared statements. A prepared statement is a predefined SQL query that takes a user input and puts the user input into placehoders using array syntax.

Here’s an insecure SQLite databse query, this directly constructs the query string from user input:

```javascript
db.get(`SELECT * FROM Employee WHERE FirstName = ${req.body.firstName} AND LastName = ${req.body.lastName}`, 
      (err, res) => {
        ...
      })
```

With array syntax, we can better protect the database:

```javascript
db.all("SELECT * FROM Employee WHERE FirstName = ? and lastName = ?",
       [req.body.lastName, req.body.firstName], 
      (err, res) => {
        ...
      })
```

This syntax ensure that the strings are escaed and that special characters are removed

## Prepared Statements: Named Placeholders

We can also use variables that we will store in an object, rather than just using the array. This comes in handy if we have to use the same input twice in a query, it also makes our code more readable.

```javascript
db.all(
  "SELECT * FROM Employee WHERE FirstName = $firstName AND LastName = $lastName",
  {
    $firstName: req.body.firstName,
    $lastName: req.body.lastName
  },
  (error, results) => {
    ...
  }
)
```

