# Defensive Coding in JavaScript

## The eval Function: Dangers and Alternatives

A built-in function `eval()` takes a string argument and will execute it a JavaScript code. So for example:

```javascript
// Code that will close an application
const user_input = "process.exit(0)";
eval(user_input);
```

Using these with user input, can obviously be very dangerous, but this function is also used with some other built-in functions:

- `setInterval()`
- `setTimeout()`
- `new Function()`

There are npm packages that use similar functions: `safe-eval` and `expression-eval` . These will throw errors that prevent most dangerous code from executing, and they have access to less of the global objects than `eval` does.

In general though, DON’T USE IT. And if you really need to, don’t use it with user input.

## The exec method: Dangers and Alternatives

The `exec()` method is similar to `eval()`, however, instead of execuiting JavaScript code, it will execute a shell script that is passed to it as a string argument. Imagine the following:

```javascript
user_input = "cat *.js";
exec(user_input);
```

This could print all of the JavaScript files in the current directory, potentially exposing other vulnerabilities.

`execFile()` is similar, but the arguments and commands are separated which prevents piped commands and path variable access:

```javascript
import { exec, execFile } from "child_process";

// Runs shell command as is
exec("ls -lah /tmp");

// Requires a command and the specified arguments to execute
execFile("ls", ["-lah", "/tmp"]);
```

`execFile()` is much safer than `exec()` since the user input would not be injected directly.

## Dangers and Secure Use of the fs Module

The `fs` module gives your JavaScript code access to your whole file system, and any potential attackers too if used insecurely. The `fs` module specifically allows vulnerabilities like path traversal and file inclusion. Here's an example of how this could be dangerous:

```javascript
const user_input = "./example.txt";
fs.unlinkSync(user_input);
```

Using `unlink` , an attacker just deleted `example.txt` !! Now imgine if the user with this access began using `../` to navigate teh file system from this input. Here's how we can make this more secure.

```javascript
const user_input = "example.txt"
const root_directory = process.cwd(); // Hard-coded path that will restrict scope
const file_path = path.join(root_directory, file_name);
fs.unlinkSync(filePath);
```

We could also make this more secure by hiding the `root_directory` in an environment variable.

## Dangers and Secure Use of Regular Expressions

When using Regular Expressions to validate user input, if the RegEx is poorly constructed or is evaluating a long string, the number of backtracking steps can grow at an exponential rate. Specifically, as the location of unmatched characters increases so do the backtracking steps.

Attackers will use this poorly formatted RegEx to perform denail of service (DOS) attacks, slowing and/or crashing your website.

Instead, use `validator` or use `safe-regex` .

## Secure YourCode: Strict Mode

Strict mode in JavaScript will by default throw more errors that would ordinarily be silent. It is easy to invoke as well: just write `”use strict”;`  at the top of your file.

Here’s an example:

```javascript
// Runs fine without strict mode
x = "codecademy";
```

```javascript
// Throws "ReferenceError"
"use strict";
x = "codecademy";
```

```javascript
// Runs in strict mode if the variable is declared with a declaration keyword
"use strict";
var x = "codecademy";
```

## Secure Your Code: Static Code Analysis

Using a *linter*, a tool that will analyze your code without executing it can help you avoid errors, bugs and security vulnerabilities. This is called static code analysis. Some popular linters are:

- [ESLint](https://eslint.org)
- [JSLint](https://www.jslint.com)
- [JSHint](https://jshint.com/)

A linter can also be configured to be more or less strict. These can also be used to enfore code formatting.

