# Display and Positioning

### Flow of HTML

- Without CSS, a browser will render **left to right** and **top to bottom**.
- CSS can change the positioning of elements with a few other properties.

### Position

- Block-level elements create blcoks that are the full width of their parent elements. They do not overlap and they, by default, position themselves on the left side of the browser.
- Using the `position` property, we can change the default position. It's values are:
   - `static` - default
   - `relative`
   - `absolute`
   - `fixed`
   - `sticky`

### Position: Relative

- This allows you to position an element **relative** *to the default static position*.
- After adding `property: relative;` to a ruleset, you will also need to add the following *offset properties*
   - `top` - moves down *from* the top
   - `bottom` - moves up *from* the bottom
   - `left` - moves *away* from the left (to the right)
   - `right` - moves *away* from the right (to the left)
   - These will do nothing if the element’s position is `static`.
- You can add values that are px em or percentages.

### Position: Absolute

- This makes all other elements ignore the position of this element. It will be position relative *to its nearest parent element*. Then use offset properties to determine the final position.

### Position: Fixed

- This positions the element to one point on the screen, regardless of whether or not the user scrolls.
- Then use offset properties to put it exatly where you want.

### Position: Sticky

- The element is part of the flow of the document until it fulfils an offset property value, at which point it will *stick* to its position on the screen.

### Z-Index

- The `z-index` property will change the depth of elements if they were to overlap. It accepts integer values, the default value is 0. The higher the integer, the further forward the position.
- `z-index` does not work on `static` positioned elements.

### Inline Display

- Every HTML element has its own default `display` value. It determines whether or not the element can **share horizontal space**.
- Some elements default to `display: inline` like `<em>` `<strong>` and `<a>`.
- `inline` elements cannot be altered by `height` or `width` properties.
- You can change any element into an `inline` element.

### Display: Block

- **Block-level** elements take up the full width of the page by default. The elements also fill that whole area by default, but their `width` can be set.
- Even if the content doesn’t span the whole page, the element itself will take up all that space.
- Some elements that are `display: block` by defautl are `<h1>` through `<h6>`, `<p>`, `<div>` and `<footer>`.

### Display: Inline-Block

- Sort of a combination of the two previous, elements can appear next to eachother, but they can also be altered with `width` and `height` attributes.

### Float

- If you don't care about offsetting an opject and you just want to place it as far as it goes you can use `float`.
- `float` is set using
   - `right`
   - `left`
   - self explanitory..
   - `float: right`
   - `float: left`
- Floated elements *must* have `width` specified or it will assume the full width of the container.

### Clear

- When multiple objects are floated and they have different heights it can affect layout.
- If they hit other elements they might not allow others to move horizontally correctly.
- `clear` tells elements how to behave when they collide. These are the values:
   - `left` - the left side of the element will not touch any other element in the same containing element
   - `right` - same as above but for right
   - `both` - same as above but for both sides
   - `none` - the element can touch either side
- It essentiall lets elements skip over other elements in positioning, to not be displaced by them on whatever side you set.

