# Queries

## Select

To see columns on a dataset, use `SELECT` and specify the columns

```sql
SELECT column1, column2
FROM table_name;
```

## As

To change the name of a column to an alias in the view use the `AS` keyword

```sql
SELECT name AS 'Titles'
FROM movies;
```

The format of the alias will differ from one RDBMS to another. This is SQLite. In Postgres no quotes or double quotes may be required.

## Distinct

To return only unique values in a column, use the `DISTINCT` keyword

```sql
SELECT DISTINCT tools
FROM inventory;
```

## Where

To restrict or filter the data returned, use the `WHERE` clause with a condition that should evaluate `true`

```sql
SELECT *
FROM movies
WHERE imdb_rating >8;
```

## Like

For loser comparison in `WHERE` use the `LIKE` operator with a pattern.

```sql
SELECT *
FROM movies
WHERE name LIKE 'Se_en'
```

- Will return 'Seven' and 'Se7en'
- The `_` is a wildcard character that will take any individual character

To match 0 or more missing characters in a pattern use the `%` wildcard operator.

```sql
SELECT *
FROM movies
WHERE name LIKE '%man%';
```

- Will return any name that contains the sequential characters 'man'
- Not case sensitive

## Is Null

Null values are not zero, they are unknown or missing. `=` or `≠`  operators will not work.

To test for null values, use the `IS NULL` or `IS NOT NULL` operators.

```sql
SELECT name
FROM movies
WHERE imdb_rating IS NOT NULL;
```

## Between

To test for values in a range, use the `BETWEEN` operator with two values and the `AND` keyword.

```sql
SELECT *
FROM movies
WHERE year BETWEEN 1990 AND 1999;
```

If values are text, then `BETWEEN` filters the alphabetical range.

Includes the first value, up to the second value. With text, this means that 'A' would be followed by 'AA' and so on. If you put `WHERE name BETWEEN 'A' and 'J';` you will get all names that start with an A but not the ones that start with a J, because that would be after 'J'.

## And

To find records that fulfil multiple conditions in a `WHERE` clause, use the `AND` operator.

```sql
SELECT *
FROM movies
WHERE year BETWEEN 1990 and 1999
  AND genre = 'romance';
```

## Or

To find results that fulfil one of many conditions in a `WHERE` clause, use the `OR` operator.

```sql
SELECT *
FROM movies
WHERE year > 2014
  OR genre = 'action';
```

## Order By

To sort your results either alphabetically or numerically use, `ORDER BY` with the column to organize from.

```sql
SELECT * 
FROM movies
ORDER BY name;
```

Can also use keywords to specify `DESC` or `ASC` . Note: you do not have to display a column to order by it.

```sql
SELECT * 
FROM movies
WHERE imdb_rathing > 8
ORDER BY year DESC;
```

`ORDER BY` must always go after `WHERE` if it is present.

## Limit

To cap the number of rows in a result, use `LIMIT` followed by an integer representing the max rows.

```sql
SELECT *
FROM movies
LIMIT 10;
```

## Case

To create conditional logic, use a `CASE` statement with `WHEN` and `THEN` options.

```sql
SELECT name,
  CASE
    WHEN imdb_rating > 8 THEN 'Fantastic'
    WHEN imdb_rating > 6 THEN 'Poorly Received'
    ELSE 'Avoid at All Costs'
  END AS 'Review'
FROM movies;
```

