# Multiple Tables

## Introduction

In order to keep from repeating data across multiple tables, we will separate information. For example, in an magazine subscription database we could have the following columns:

- order_id
- customer_id
- cusotomer_name
- customer_address
- subscription_id
- subscription_description
- subscription_monthly_price
- subscription_length
- purchase_date

If all of this information was kept in one table, each subscription_id and related columns would be reported many times as well as any customers who had purchased multiple subscriptions.

So we will create three tables instead:

1. orders
2. subscriptions
3. customers

The following notes go through how we will maintain the relationships of the data across these tables.

## Combining Tables Manually

Since we are separating data, to get the full picture again of what happened, we have to combine the information in the tables to see the picture the data is painting.

To match related data together, we will **join** the two tables.

## Combining Tables with SQL

To combine tables, use a `JOIN` paired with an `ON` that matches information across tables.

```sql
SELECT *
FROM orders
JOIN customers
ON orders.customer_id = customers.customer_id;
```

The `FROM` statement tells us what table we are starting with, and then the `JOIN` statement tells us what table we are pulling from.

Since column names are often repeated, we must use `table_name.column_name` as the syntax in the `ON` statement.

We can also narrow down the columns that we select

```sql
SELECT order.order_id, customers.customer_name
FROM orders
JOIN customers
ON orders.customer_id = customers.customer_id;
```

Here we are only displaying the Order ID and the name of the customer, and we’re doing this by joining the customer ID from the order with the related ID in the customer table, even though we aren’t displaying it.

## Inner Joins

An *inner join* is the default type of `JOIN` when we use the keyword. It will only include the rows that match our `ON` condition. Meaning that if there is an id that is not in one of the tables, that result will be left out.

## Left Joins

To keep unmatched tows from the first table, use a `LEFT JOIN` as you would a normal `JOIN` .

```sql
SELECT *
FROM table1
LEFT JOIN table2
  ON table1.c2 = table2.c2
```

- Even if table2 doesn't have a matching c2 value, the record from table1 will still be populated in the result.

## Primary Key vs. Foreign Key

When we are separating data across tables, the data point that uniquely identifies each row of the table is called the **primary key**.

- For `orders` it is `order_id`
- For `subscriptions` it is `subscription_id`
- For `customers` it is `customer_id`

Primary keys must…

- …not be `NULL`
- …be unique within their table.
- …singluar. No table can have more than one primary key column.

Now remember the columns of the `orders` table: `order_id` , `customer_id` , `subscription_id` , `purchase_date`

There notice that the primary key for the `subscriptions` and the `customers` table both appear here. When a primary key appears in a different table, it is called a **foerign key**.

Most `JOIN` s will happen by joining a primary key from one table to its related foreign key in another table.

## Cross Join

To combine all rows with a row of another, use a `CROSS JOIN` .

```sql
SELECT shirts.shirt_color, pants.pants_color
FROM shirts
CROSS JOIN pants;
```

In a `CROSS JOIN` you aren't joining on any columns, so there is no `ON` statement.

If there were three shirts and two pants, we would get six results in this table. One row for each possible combination. A `CROSS JOIN` is often used to compare each row of a table to a list of values.

In an example of a table that has 12 months, and a table that has information about our newspaper subscribers, here is how we could use `CROSS JOIN` to find out how many subscribers we have in each month:

```sql
SELECT month, 
  COUNT(*) AS 'subscribers'
FROM newspaper
CROSS JOIN months
WHERE start_month <= month
  AND end_month >= month
GROUP BY month;
```

## Union

To stack two tables with the same number of columns with matching data types, use a `UNION` .

```sql
SELECT *
FROM table1
UNION
SELECT *
FROM table 2
```

## With

To query a results table, espcially with calculated information, use `WITH` .

```sql
WITH previous_results AS (
  SELECT customer_id, 
    COUNT(subscription_id) AS 'subscriptions'
  FROM orders
  GROUP BY customer_id
)
SELECT *
FROM previous_results
JOIN customers
  ON previous_results.customer_id = customers.id;
```

We are performing an entirely separate query in the `WITH` statement, that we can access and maniplate within our larger query. In this example, we are pulling the number of subscriptions per customer with the `WITH` statement, and then with the result of that query, we are `JOIN` ing with the customers table, so that we can display the customer name in the table.

The `WITH` statement takes an *alias* that can be used to access any of the results of the query in the same way that you would access a table.