# Introduction to Express.js

### Introduction to Server-Side Frameworks with Express.js

- A framework is a set of code that saves developers time in performing common tasks.
- Using a framework means that you have to use certain syntax that is common to the framework
- Express is a framework that is designed to work with Node.js that simplifies some of the more common things that you will have to do to create a back end.

[Express 4.x - API Reference](http://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html)

### Introduction

- Express can quickly create small back-ends and can scale to full back-end application suites.
- This lesson focuses on creating the CRUD capabilities of a sample application:
   - Create
   - Read
   - Update
   - Delete

### Starting a Server

- Express is a Node modules, and it will need to be imported into the file:

```javascript
const express = require('express');
```

- Then we must declare an instance of the express application:

```javascript
const app = express();
```

- Then we can activate the server with the following `.listen()` method, which takes two arguments:
   - A port number
   - A callback function that will execute when the server is active

```javascript
app.listen(4000, () => {
  console.log('The server is active.')
})
```

### Writing Your First Route

- In order to have the server respond to requests, we will have to set up *routes* which will define what will be done with the information and what kind of response to send.
- The *path* is what follows the FQDN, or in a localhost, what follows the hostname and port number so `localhost:4000/user` would have the path of `/user`
- In every request, there is also an HTTP verb included that specifies the type of request, we will handle these with express as well. for a GET request, we will specify the route with the `.get` method which will take path (typically a string) and a callback function that handles the request and sends and returns a response

```javascript
const moods = [{ mood: 'excited about express!'}, { mood: 'route-tastic!'}];

app.get('/moods', (req, res, next) => {
  // Logic to send back moods array in response
})
```

- The arguments of the callback function are the request that is sent to the server, and the response that Express will eventually send to the client.

### Sending a Response

- HTTP operates on a "one request - one response" protocol, meaning that for each request the server will send one and only one response. The client, likewise, expects to receive one response per request.
- We can tell the server to send this response by using the `.send()` method for the `res` argument. The method will take any object and return it in the response body.

```javascript
const monsters = [
  { type: 'werewolf' }, 
  { type: 'hydra' }, 
  { type: 'chupacabra' }
];
app.get('/monsters', (req, res, next) => {
  res.send(monsters);
});
```

- Another method that can be used is `.json()` which sends JSON format responses. It also will send any object passed to it.

### Matching Route Paths

- Express checks that the verb matches and the route matches in the order that they are declared in the code.

### Getting a Single Expression

- Routes can also be used dynamically to find resources using parameters that are indicated with a `:` at the beginning. Any part of a route that follows a `:` is a *wildcard* meaning that it will match any string that is inputted there.

```javascript
const posts = {
  '1dri': { post: '...'},
  ...,
  '13dri': { post: '...' }
}
// GET /test/13dri
app.get('/test/:id', (req, res, next) => {
  console.log(req.params) // { id: '13dri'};
  res.send(posts[req.params.id]);
})
```

### Setting Status Codes

- The `.send()` method defaults to a `200` status code, for 'ok' but we can also set the status code for a response manually by chaining on a `.status()` method.

```javascript
app.get('/test/:id', (req, res, next) => {
  const element = getElement(res.params.id)
  if (!element) {
    res.status('404').send('Element not found')
  }
  res.status('200').send(element);
})
```

### Matching Longer Paths

- If an additional slash is added to a route, then express will ignore it. For a path to match, the whole path must match. For example see below:

```javascript
// GET /test/123
app.get('/test', (req, res, next) => {    // Will be skipped
  //
})

app.get('/test/:id', (req, res, next) => { // Correct! Response will send
  //
})

app.get('/test/123', (req, res, next) => {  // A path already matched
  //                                        // This is skipped
})
```

### Other HTTP Methods

- Each verb has an express method:
   - `app.get()` - GET a resource
   - `app.put()` - EDIT a resource
   - `app.post()` - ADD a resource
   - `app.delete()` - REMOVE a resource

### Using Queries

- Some requests will also include a query string following the path. For example if we send a request to the endpoint `/test/:id?name=nolan&age=26` then `/test/:id` is the path and `?name=nolan&age=26` is the query string.
- A query string is not interpreted as part of the path, but instead it is added to the `req` as a JavaScript object located at `req.query`
- A query comes in key value pairs and the pairs are separated by the `&` symbol

```javascript
const usersToUpdate = { '145': { name: '', age: ''}};
// PUT /test/145?name=nolan?age=26
app.put('/test/:id' (req, res, next) => {
  const userUpdates = req.query; // { name: 'nolan', age: '26'}
  usersToUpdate[req.params.id] = userUpdates;
  res.send(usersToUpdate[req.params.id]);
})
```

### Matching By HTTP Verb

- Express matches not only through the path, but also through the proper verb. So you can have two expressions that have the same path so long as the verbs are different

### Creating An Expression

- To create an expression Express provides the `.post()` method to handle POST requests.
- The HTTP status code for POST requests is `201 Created`

### Deleting Old Expressions

- `.delete()`
- These requests usually include parameters since they need to specify which resource to remove

