# Middleware

### Introduction

Middleware is software that connects applications. In Express.js applications, to reduce code duplication (which enhances the readability and resiliency of our code), we will use middleware that will sit between the front-end and the API.

### DRYing Code with Functions

- Functions that perform specific tasks are good, but if there are multiple functions that perfrorm *almost* the same task, then there is probably a way to combine them. Notice how much is the same between these three functions:

```javascript
const addFive = number => {
  const fiveAdded = number + 5;
  console.log(`Your number plus 5 is ${fiveAdded}`);
}

const addTen = number => {
  const tenAdded = number + 10;
  console.log(`Your number plus 10 is ${tenAdded}`);
}

const addTwenty = number => {
  const twentyAdded = number + 20;
  console.log(`Your number plus 20 is ${twentyAdded}`);
}
```

- These could all be simplified into:

```javascript
const addNumber = (number, addend) => {
  const numAdded = number + addend;
  console.log(`Your number plus ${addend} is ${numAdded}`);
}
```

- The **DRY** principle is “Don't Repeat Yourself” - Violating DRY is creating code that is consistently repeating itself by performing the same set of instructions multiple times in different places.

### DRYing Routes With app.use()

- In Express, just moving our repeated code into a function is the start for DRY principles. If we wanted something to run on every request, it is not very DRY to put that function call in every endpoint. But, using `app.use()` can execute this on every call.
- `app.use()` is a method that adds *middleware*, code that will execute after the front-end code and before the endpoint code. it Sits in the middle. The method takes a callback function that executes on each request and allows us to perform logic based on it. The syntax is remarkably simialr to routing:

```javascript
app.use((req, res, next) => {
  console.log('Request received');
})
```

- When we look at it this way, the routing is essentailly just a specialized middleware as well.

### next()

- Middleware in Express will be called in the order that it is in the file. If we want multiple middleware to execute, we can put them in a row and invoke the third callback parameter, `.next()` which hands control of the request to the next middleware.

```javascript
app.use((req, res, next) => {
  console.log("A sorcerer approaches!");
  next();
});

app.get('/magic/:spellname', (req, res, next) => {
  console.log("The sorcerer is casting a spell!");
  next();
});

app.get('/magic/:spellname', (req, res, next) => {
  console.log(`The sorcerer has cast ${req.params.spellname}`);
  res.status(200).send();
});

app.get('/magic/:spellname', (req, res, next) => {
  console.log("The sorcerer is leaving!");
});

// Accessing http://localhost:4001/magic/fireball 
// Console Output:
// "A sorcerer approaches!"
// "The sorcerer is casting a spell!"
// "The sorcerer has cast fireball"
```

### Request and Response Parameters

- The routes that we created in an earlier lesson are also middlewares. All middlewares have access to the request object, the response object and the next middleware in the middleware stack.

### Route-Level app.use() - Single Path

- `app.use()` takes an optional route string as its first parameter. This will limit the functionality of the middleware to only execute on requests to that path.

### Route-Level app.use() - Multiple Paths

- The path parameter for `app.use()` (and I would surmize any of the other routing methods) can take more than just a string. It will take all of the following:
   - A **string** that represents a path
   - A path **pattern**
   - A **regular expression** that matches paths
   - An **array** of any combination of the above

### Middleware Stacks

- Middleware is only defined as a function with a specific *signature*, namely a function with three arguments: request and resonse objects and a next callback function. So we can declare these outside of our middleware mounters:

```javascript
const middlewareFunction = (req, res, next) => {
  console.log('I\'m a middleware function');
}

app.use(middlewareFunction)
```

- This is also helpful to know becuase all of our routing methods, including `app.use()` can take multiple middleware functions that will execute in order, which may look something like this:

```javascript
const theFirstOne = (req, res, next) => {};
const theSecond = ( req, res, next) => {};
const thirdTimesTheCharm = (req, res, next) => {};

app.use('/', theFirstOne, theSecond, thirdTimesTheCharm);
app.get('/resource', theFirstOne);
app.post('/anotherone', thirdTimesTheCharm, theSecond);
```

### Open-Source Middleware: Logging

- Don't forget that there is usually a package for a problem that you're encountering that is common to most development projects. We don't want to waste time by re-coding and debugging solutions that are out there and ready to be used.
- For example: We could manually create a middleware that creates logs, but there is a middleware called `morgan` that does that for us. Look up solutions before you code your own.

### Some Other Middleware to Use

- `body-parser` - will parse the request body automatically into `req.body`

### Error Handling Middleware

- Error Handling will tell the user that an error occured, and keeps the program running.
- Erorr handling *must* be the last `app.use()` in the file.

```javascript
app.use((err, req, res, next) => {
  console.error(err.stack);
  res.status(500).send('Something broke!');
})
```

- This is very similar to other kinds of middleware, but this one takes an extra parameter, the **error object**
- Express also has an error-handler built in that handles errors that we haven’t acocunted for. The way that we call our error handling middleware, is by calling `next()` with the error object:

```javascript
app.use((req, res, next) => {
  const newValue = possiblyProblematicOperation();
  if (newValue === undefined) {
    let undefinedError = new Error('newValue was not defined!');
    return next(undefinedError);
  }
  next();
});

app.use((err, req, res, next) => {
  const status = err.status || 500;
  res.status(status).send(err.message);
});
```

### Discovering Open-Source Middleware

[Express middleware](https://expressjs.com/en/resources/middleware.html)

