# What is CORS?

Web pages download and use and render resources from all over the web. This is handy, but it is also a security risk if left unchecked.

### What is a security policy?

A security policy is one of the ways to mitigate the risks of being publicly exposed to the internet.

#### Same-Origin

This is the strictest of the security policies, this means that documets on a server can only interact with other documents on that same server, and no others.

When they are on the same server, they are said to have the same **origin**. But, what is an origin? Similar to a socket, an origin is defined by it's protocol, host (or address) and the port number.

```plaintext
http://www.example.com/foo-bar.html
|-- Protocol: HTTP
|-- Host: www.example.com/foo-bar.html
|-- Port: 80 (the default port for HTTP)
```

On a same-origin policy, you wouldn’t be able to access pulling resources from https://www.en.example.com/hello.html would not be allowed, because https runs on port 443. So same-origin is very restrictive, separating even resources that are on the same domain and server.

#### Cross-Origin

This is where the name for CORS comes from: **Cross Origin Resource Sharing**

### What is CORS?

At it’s most basic, the CORS policy will allow for resources at a given URL to access resources from other origins. CORS will allow servers to specify who or what origins can access the assets on the server.

### Why is CORS necessary?

CORS allows users to apply rules for who from and how resources can be accessed and used. For example, many web servers will allow GET requests, meaning that outside servers or devices can access its content, but they will not allow for PATCH, PUT or DELETE requests as all of these can be malicious.

### How does CORS manage requests from external resources?

CORS manages requests through HTTP headers, here are the standard headers:

```plaintext
Access-Control-Allow-Origin
Access-Control-Allow-Credentials
Access-Control-Allow-Headers
Access-Control-Allow-Methods
Access-Control-Expose-Headers
Access-Control-Max-Age
Access-Control-Request-Headers
Access-Control-Request-Method
Origin
```

#### Access-Control-Allow Origin

This header allows servers to specify how their resources are shared with external domains.

When a request is made to a server for a resouce, the server holding the resource will respond with a vale for this header. This value can be a `*` which means *any domain*. Or it may respond with a domain or list of domains.

#### The Other Headers → [Link](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers#CORS)

### Pre-flight Requests

Before an HTTP request is made, there is what’s called a *pre-flight request*. Preflight requests are not any of the standard HTTP request verbs, they use the OPTIONS header. This request determines if the following one is safe to allow for transmission.

The pre-flight request allows the server to block requests before they are allowed to be sent to the server.

Pre-flight requests will also be triggered by the modifying of any of the automatically set request headers.

### How do I implement CORS?

In Node, you can use the `setHeader()` method to modify the CORS policy

```javascript
response.setHeader('Content-Type', 'text/html');
```

In Express, there is a CORS middleware that you can install:

```bash
$ npm i cors
```

```javascript
var express = require('express');
var cors = require('cors');
var app = express();

app.use(cors());

app.get('/hello/:id', function (req, res, next) {
  res.json({msg: 'Hello world, we are CORS-enabled!'});
});

app.listen(80, function () {
  console.log('CORS-enabled web server is listening on port 80');
});
```

