# Whiteboarding

Whiteboarding is a possible method of interviewing that involves having a candidate solve a problem by hand. Here are the recommended steps to follow:

1. **Clarify** the problem.
   - Repeat the problem back to them in your own words.
   - Ask *any* clarifying questions comes to mind to start a dialog with the interviewer so that you can understand the problem.
1. Create **Inputs** and find **edge cases**
   - This is an extention of clarification
   - Come up with a “happy path” that reflects a common scenerio
   - Think about inputs that don’t reflect common scenerios, or solutions that may cause problems. Ask if you will need to account for these things.
1. **Outline** the solution
   - Show your thought process, make sure that it is a dialog with your interviewer.
   - Write out pseduo code
   - Don’t disregard the input of the interviewer, you want to come across as easy to work with, it is also a show of humility.
1. **Code** the solution
   - *Handwrite* the code.
   - Keep talking, make sure that you are communicating what you’re thinking as you’re writing code.
   - Why are you writing each line of the code that you’re writing?
1. **Test** the solution
   - Don't say "I'm done!" - Check your work!
   - Talk through the execution of the code
   - Write out your variables on the board and update them as you go
   - If you run into a bug, don’t freeze, it’s normal.
      - How can you account for the problem?
1. **Analyze** the solution
   - This may be asked for explicitly, but you should do it anyways
   - Figure out your code’s time and space complexity
   - Can it be optimized? Why or why not?

