# Strategies for Complex State

### Introduction to Strategies for Complex State

- Redux shines in settings where state is very complex it is advantageous to have a centralized store for state management.

### Slices

Here’s an example of what state may look like in a todo app:

```javascript
state = {
  todos: [
    {
      id: 0, 
      text: 'Complete the Learn Redux course', 
      isCompleted: false
    },
    {
      id: 1, 
      text: 'Build a counter app', 
      isCompleted: true
    },
  ],
  visibilityFilter: 'SHOW_INCOMPLETE'
};
```

- The top-level `state` properties (in this case `state.todos` and `state.visibilityFilter` ) are known as **slices**.
- Each *slice* will represent a different feature of the application.
- A slice can be any data value
- Most Redux applications begin with an `initialState` which allows the programmer to do two key things:
   - Plan out the general structure of state
   - Provide an initial state value to the reducer function

```javascript
const initialState = {
  todos: [],
  visibilityFilter: 'SHOW_ALL'
};
const todosReducer = (state = initialState, action) => {
  // rest of todosReducer logic omitted
};
```

### Actions and Payloads for Complex State

- When application state has multiple slices, individual actions typically only change on slice at a time.
- It is recommended to format your action types with the pattern `sliceName/actionDescriptor` so that you are clarifying which slice of state you are updating.
- Once you have a clear idea of the actions that will have to be dispatched, its time to make action creators

### Immutable Updates & Complex State

- After actions functions are defined it's time to create the reducer that will actualy do the updating.

### Reducer Composition

- Having only one reducer can become very complex as state becomes larger in an application.
- We can use *reducer composition*, a strategy in which we create an individual *slice reducer* for each slice.
- We then will use a `rootReducer` to reform our single state object.

```javascript
// Handles only `state.todos`.
const initialTodos = [
  { id: 0, text: 'learn redux', completed: false },
  { id: 1, text: 'build a redux app', completed: true },
  { id: 2, text: 'do a dance', completed: false },
];
const todosReducer = (todos = initialTodos, action) => {
  switch (action.type) {
    case 'todos/addTodo': 
      return [...todos, action.payload]
    case 'todos/toggleTodo':
      return todos.map(todo => {
        return (todo.id === action.payload.id) ? 
          { ...todo, completed: !todo.completed } : 
          {...todo};
      });
    default:
      return todos;
  }
};

// Handles only `state.filter`
const initialFilter = 'SHOW_INCOMPLETE',
const filterReducer = (filter = initialFilter, action) => {
  switch (action.type) {
    case 'filter/setFilter':
      return action.payload;
    default:
      return filter;
};

const rootReducer = (state = {}, action) => {
  const nextState = {
    todos: todosReducer(state.todos, action),
    filter: filterReducer(state.filter, action)
  };
  return nextState;
};

const store = createStore(rootReducer);
```

- In this pattern, when an `action` is dipatched to the `store`
   - The `rootReducer` called each slice reducer, regardless of the `action.type` with the incoming `action` and the appropriate slice of the the state as arguments.
   - The slice reducers each determine if they need to update their slice of state, or simple return their slice of state unchanged.
   - The `rootReducer` reassembles the updated slice values in a new state object
- This will keep us from having to continually copy parts of state that we are not updating into other objects, the `switch` statement only has to immutably update its own slice of state. As state objects become more deeply nested it will become even more clear why this is necessary.

### combineReducers

- Here is another example of the concept that we covered in the above section

```javascript
import { createStore } from 'redux';

// todosReducer and filterReducer omitted

const rootReducer = (state = {}, action) => {
  const nextState = {
    todos: todosReducer(state.todos, action),
    filter: filterReducer(state.filter, action)
  };
  return nextState;
};

const store = createStore(rootReducer);
```

- This is a lot of code that we are writing to work more under the hood. So a more declarative, or abstrated method is provided for this by the Redux library

```javascript
import { createStore, combineReducers } from 'redux'

// todosReducer and filterReducer omitted.

const reducers = {
    todos: todosReducer,
    filter: filterReducer
};
const rootReducer = combineReducers(reducers);
const store = createStore(rootReducer);
```

- You can even further refactor the last 6 lines of code to

```javascript
const store = createStore(combineReducers({
  todos: todosReducer,
  filter: filterReducer
}))
```

### A File Structure for Redux

- Since store files can get long fairly quickly, it is better practce to break up a Redux application using the Redux Ducks pattern

```other
src/
|-- index.js
|-- app/
    |-- store.js
|-- features/
    |-- featureA/
        |-- featureASlice.js
    |-- featureB/
        |-- featureBSlice.js
```

- All of the redux logic lives in `src/`
   - `index.js` is the entry point for the entire application
   - `featureA/` and `featureB/` contain the logic files for their state slices
   - The `app/` directory only has one file - `store.js` (for now) which will create the `rootReducer` and the Redux `store`

## Passing Store Data Through the Top Level React Component

- Now here is an example of a full src/ file structure for a React/Redux application

```other
src/
|-- index.js
|-- app/
    |-- App.js (+)
    |-- store.js
|-- components/
    |-- FavoriteButton.js (+)
    |-- Recipe.js (+)
|-- features/
    |-- allRecipes/
        |-- AllRecipes.js (+)
        |-- allRecipesSlice.js
    |-- favoriteRecipes/
        |-- FavoriteRecipes.js (+)
        |-- favoriteRecipesSlice.js
    |-- searchTerm/
        |-- SearchTerm.js (+)
        |-- searchTermSlice.js
```

- Notice that the component files and the state management files are located in the same folder.
- The top-level component `<App />` is responsible for rendering all the other components and passing the necessary data down to them. In a Redux application, the data passed to each feature-component includes:
   - The slice of the `store` 's state that needs to be rendered.
   - The `store.dispatch` method to trigger state changes through user interactions.
- This top-level distribution of `store` slices and methods to feature-components begins in `index.js` which is where the `<App />` component itself will be rendered.
- We need to pass the `store` into `<App />` as a prop.

### Using Store Data Within Feature Components

- Pluggin in a feature-componenet to a Redux application involves the following steps:
   - Import the React feature-components into the top-level App.js file
   - Render each feature-component and pass along the slice of `state` and the `dispatch` method as props.
   - Within each feature-component:
      - Extract the slice of `state` and `dispatch` from `props`.
      - Render the component using data from the slice of state.
      - Import any action creators from the associated slice file.
      - Dispatch actions in response to user inputs within the component.

