# The Script Element

### JavaScript and HTML

- Using `<script>` we can put JS directly in HTML

### The src attribute

- Instead of having all the code in your HTML file, you can separate your concerns by linking a js file to an html file.
- We will use the `src` attribute on a `<script>` tag in the `<head>` of the html file using a file path name.
- `<script src="./exampleScript.js"></script>`
- You can also look to a CDN (Content Delivery Network) that will hold script or styles.

### How are scripts loaded?

- `<script>` elements are parsed in the order that they appear in the HTML file
- It will load and execute once it parses the element.
- `<script>` must be fully executed before moving onto the next element which can lead to a delay in leading time.
- scripts are loaded sequentially, if one script depends on another, they should be placed in that order inside the HTML file

### Defer attribute

- using the `defer` attribute on a `<script>` element tells the parser to execute only after everything else on the page has been parsed
- If a script is interacting with the DOM then you want to use the `defer` attribute

### Async attribute

- `async` will tell the script to execute *asynchronously* meaning that they parser will continue to load. As soon as the js is downloaded it will be executed
- If the script is independent of other scripts to function, asynchronous loading is the best for load times.
- Just make sure it doesn’t matter when the file loads

