# JavaScript and the DOM

### The Document Keyword

- The door in JavaScript to the DOM is the `document` keyword
- `document` gives you access to the root node and allows access to children of the DOM as properties
- Want to access the body? `document.body`

### Tweak an Element

- the `.innerHTML` property allows you to access and set the contents of an element
- `document.body.innerHTML = 'The cat loves the dog.';`
- You can also add any valid HTML elements
- `document.body.innerHTML = '<h1>Title</h1>'`

### Select and Modify Elements

- We can use CSS selectors to access DOM elements in JavaScript
- `.querySelector()` method allows us to specify a CSS selector as a string and it will return the first element that matches that selector
- You can access an element by its id through the `.getElementById('example-id')`
- `.getElementsByClassName()`
- `.getElementsByTagName()`
   - These two return arrays of elements, and you can use bracket notation to access individual elements in the arrays.

### Style an Element

- The `.style` property will allow us ot access inline HTML style
- Syntax follows `element.style.property` like the following code

```javascript
let blueElement = document.querySelector('.blue');
blueElement.style.backgroundColor = 'blue';
```

- JS will still use camel case rather than hyphen notation
- You can also chain like this:

```javascript
document.querySelector('.blue').style.fontFamily = 'Roboto';
```

### Traversing the DOM

- A *parent node* and a *child node* refer only to the direct decendant or direct parent of the node.
- Every element has a `.parentNode` and a `.children` property.
   - Children returns an array
   - If either doesn’t exist, it will return `null`

### Create and Insert Elements

- `.createElement()` method allows the creation of a new element based on the specified tag name passed into it as an argument.
- It will create an empty element
- You can also assign values to properties of the item.

```javascript
let paragraph = document.createElement('p');

paragraph.id = 'info';
paragraph.innerHTML = 'The text inside the paragraph';
```

- To add the element to the web page you must also assign it to be the child of an element that is already in the DOM - this is called *appending*
   - It will become the parent’s last child node

```javascript
document.body.appendChild(paragraph);
```

### Remove an Element

```javascript
let paragraph = document.querySelector('p');
document.body.removeChild(paragraph);
```

- querySelector() method returns the first paragraph in the docment and assigns to the paragraph element.
- The removeChild() method is chained to the parent of the paragraph ‘document.body’ and removes the argument passed by the variable ‘paragraph'
- You can also hide elements by changing the hidden property

```javascript
document.getElementById('sign').hidden = true;
```

### Add Click Interactivity

- You can add interactivity through assigning functions to run based on an event.
- Events can be clicks, hovers, and more
- `.onclick` allows you to assign a function to run on when a click event happens on an element

```javascript
let element = document.querySelector('button');

element.onclick = function() {
  element.style.backgroundColor = 'blue';
}
```

- You could also assign onclick by function name

```javascript
let element = document.querySelector('button');

function turnBlue() {
  element.style.backgroundColor = 'blue';
}

element.onclick = turnBlue;
```

