# DOM Events with JavaScript

### What is an Event?

- Events are user interactions and browsser manipulations that you can program to trigger functionality.
- When the user interactions and event is fired.
- Being able to respond to events makes your website interactive or *dynamic*

### “Firing” Events

- There are three stages to interactivity:
   - Firing of an event, or the triggering of an event.
   - Detection of the event done by an *event listener*
   - and the response from a *handler function*
- Most events aren’t being listened for, they don’t have handlers.

### Event Handler Registration

- We can use the `.addEventListener()` which takes two parameters, an *event* and an *event handler* - or a function.
- We assign this to an *event target* which is the element that listens for the event

```javascript
let eventTarget = document.getElementById('targetElement');

eventTarget.addEventListener('click', function () {
  // this block of code will run when a click event
  // happens on eventTarget element
})
```

- It is best practice to use named functions however rather than anonymous functions so that your code reamins organized and reusable:

```javascript
function eventHandler() {
  // this lock of code will run
}

eventTarget.addEventListener('click', eventHandlerFunction);
```

### Adding Event Handlers

- Another shorhand to do this is to use the `.onevent` like `.on` followed by the lowercase event type name

```javascript
eventTarget.onclick = eventHandlerFunction;
```

- Codecademy will be using the previous syntax, but this is also widely used

### Removing Event Handlers

- `.removeEventLister()` will reverse the listener. You must specify event and function for this as well
- This works well to put in a handler function to make sure that the action can’t be repeated

### Event Object Properties

- Events are stored as **event objects** with related data and functionalities as properties and methods.
- An `event` object can be passed as a paremter into the event handler and things about it can be used.

```javascript
function eventHandlerFunc(event){
  console.log(event.timeStamp);
}
eventTarget.addEventListener('click', eventHandlerFunc);
// When eventTarget is clicked the
// time stamp of the event object belonging
// to the click will be logged.
```

- `.target` property references the element that the event is registered to
- `.type` property access the name of the event
- `.timeStamp` property accesses the number of milliseconds that passed since the document loaded and event was triggered.

### Event Types

- `load` - fires after website files completely load in the browser

### Mouse Events

- click, wheel, mousedown, mouseup, mouseover, mouseout

### Keyboard Events

- keydown, keyup, keypress
- `.key` is a property for each keyboard event that stores the values of the key pressed by the user
- Can program to reacto to specific keys

