# Introduction to Form Validation

### Why Validate Forms?

- We need data to be clean so that we can use our data at scale later. We also want it to be usable by our functions and operations later.
- Validated entry also keeps our sites secure, keeping accounts protected and also keeping unfriendly code from being injected into our site

### Regular Expressions

- A *regular expression* is a sequence of characters representing a pattern.
- We use regular expressions to help computers recognize patterns in strings, match parts of a string, confirm that data is formatted correctly or even replace parts of strings with different characters.

### Client-side Validation: HTML

- **Client-side** **validation** is where problematic inputs are not allowed to be submitted by the user.
- The *client* is the process that interacts with the server on bahalf of a user -- in websites, that is the browser
- Client-side validations do not requre any interaction with the database
- HTML includes some of these:
   - `required`
   - Min and max lengths for text inputs
   - input pattern matching through regular expressions
- If any of these aren’t followed, the user recieves an error message explaining what happened.

```html
<input id="name" name="name" type="text"
  required minlength="3" maxlength="10">
```

### Client-side Validation: JavaScript

- We can also use JavaScript to create more advanced validation by writing our own scripts or by using available libraries like:
[](https://www.npmjs.com/package/just-validate)

[](https://www.npmjs.com/package/formik)

### Back-end Validation

- The back-end should never trust the data it receives becuase of malicious actors
- Back-end validation provides validation that can utilize more power, is private (so users don’t know *how* it's being validated) and can be checked against information that the front-end doesn't have access to.

