# Javascript: Promises

### What is a Promise?

- Promises are objects that represent the eventual outcome of an asynchronous operation
- Three states of a `Promise` object:
   - *pending*: initial state - operation has not completed
   - *fulfilled*: operation has completed successfully and it now has a *resolved value*
   - *rejected*: operation has failed and there is a reason for the failure. The reason is usually an `error`
- If a pomise is no longer pending, it is `settled`

### Constructing a Promise Object

```javascript
const executorFunction = (resolve, reject) => {
  if (someCondition) {
    resolve('I resolved!');
  } else {
    reject('I rejected!');
  }
}
const myFirstPromise = new Promise(executorFunction);
```

- The variable `myFirstPromise` is declared
- `myFirstPromsie` is constructed using `new Promise()` which is the `Promise` constructor method
- `executorFunction()` is passed to the constructor and has two functions as parameters: `resolve` and `reject`
- If `someCondition` is true - we invoke `resolve()` with the string `’I resolved!’`
- If `someCondition` is false, we invoke `reject()` with the string `’I rejected!’`
- `resolve()` and `reject()` are built-in functions that change the state of `Promise` obejcts.
   - `resolve` changes from pending to fulfilled
   - `reject` changed from pending to rejected
- In practice, promises resolve based on the results of asynchronous operations

### The Node setTimeout() Function

- The delay in `setTimeout()` (which is a Node function) is only the dely for the statement to be added to the queue, so it will almost always be more time than the delay that was put in becuase the message added to the queue will have to wait for the synchronous frames on the stack to clear first before it is added.

### Consuming Promises

- Promise obejcts have a `.then()` method which allows us to tell the computer what to do after the promise resolves.
- `.then()` takes two callback function as arguments, they are *handlers*
   - the first is a *success handler*, that contains the logic for the promise resolving, it's typically called `onFulfilled`
   - the second is a *failure handles*, that contains the logic for the promise rejecting, it's typically called `onRejected`
- `.then()` can be invoked with one, both, or neigher handler.
- If the appropriate handler isnot provided, `.then()` doesn't throw an error, it jsut returns a promise with the same settled value as teh promise it was called on.
- `.then()` always returns a promise.

### Success and Failure Callback Functions

```javascript
const prom = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
  resolve('Yay!');
});

const handleSuccess = (resolvedValue) => {
  console.log(resolvedValue);
};

prom.then(handleSuccess);
```

- `prom` is a promise which will resolve to `’Yay!’`
- `handleSuccess()` is defined, which prints its argument
- `prom`'s `.then()` method is invoked, passing in the `handleSuccess()` function
- Since `prom` resolves, `handleSuccess()` is invoked with `prom`'s resoved value. `’Yay!’` , so `’Yay!’` is logged to the console.

```javascript
let prom = new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
  let num = Math.random();
  if (num < .5) {
    resolve('Yay!');
  } else {
    reject('Ohhhh noooo!');
  }
});

const handleSuccess = (resolvedValue) => {
  console.log(resolvedValue);
};

const handleFailure = (rejectionReason) => {
  console.log(rejectionReason);
}

prom.then(handleSuccess, handleFailure);
```

- This promise has two different functions that handle the success or failure of the promise, since we don't know what will happen

### Using catch() with Promises

- We can separate concerns by chaining two `.then()` methods together, separating the success and failure handlers. JavaScript doesn't mind whitespace so it will look like this:

```javascript
prom.then((resolvedValue => {console.log(resolvedValue);}).then(null, (rejectionReason) => {console.log(rejectionReason);}));
// above is the same conde inline, bottom is with whitespace
prom
  .then((resolvedValue) => {
    console.log(resolvedValue);
  })
  .then(null, (rejectionReason) => {
    console.log(rejectionReason);
  });
```

- To make our code more readable we could also use the method `.catch()` for the failure handler. It will function the same way as `.then()` but only for the failure handler

```javascript
prom
  .then(resolvedValue => {
    console.log(resolvedValue);
  })
  .catch((rejectionReason) => {
    console.log(rejectionReason);
  });
```

- If the promise rejects, `.then()` will return a promise with the same rejection reason as the original promise and `.catch()` 's failure handler will be invoked with that rejection reason.

### Chaining Multiple Promises

- Chaining multiple promises together is called *composition*.
- Promisese are designed with composition in mind

```javascript
firstPromiseFunction()
  .then((firstResolveVal) => {
    return secondPromiseFunction(firstResolveVal);
  })
  .then((secondResolveVal) => {
    console.log(secondResolveVal);
  });
```

- Invoke a `firstPromiseFunction()` which returns a promise.
- Invoke `.then()` with an anonymous function as the success handler
- Inside the success handler we `return` a new promise—the result of invoking a second function, `secondPromiseFunction()` with the first promise's resolved value.
- Invoke a second `.then()` to handle the logic for the second promise settling
- Inside that `.then()` we have a success handler which will log the second promise's resolved value to the console.

> We had to `return` the promise `secondPromiseFunction(firstResolveVal)` . If we didn't then the default return of a new promise with the same settled value of the initial would have been returned. Remember `.then` always returns a promise.

### Avoiding Common Mistakes

- Mistake 1: Nesting promises instead of chaining them.

```javascript
returnsFirstPromise()
.then((firstResolveVal) => {
  return returnsSecondValue(firstResolveVal)
    .then((secondResolveVal) => {
      console.log(secondResolveVal);
    })
})
```

   - With everything nested instead of chained, the code is not clean and its harder to read.
   - Also, the second `.then()` statement is invoked inside the actual success logic rather than letting the first logic run and then going to the second.
- Mistake 2: Forgetting to `return` a promise
   - `.then()` always returns a promise, and if we don't specify it will return one that has the same condition as the original promise

### Using Promise.all()

- `Promise.all()` accepts an array of promises as its argument and returns a single promise. That single promise will settle in one of two ways:
   - If all promises in the argument array resolve, the single promise returned from `Promise.all()` will resolve with an array containing the resolve value from each promise in the argument array.
   - If any promise in the argument rejects, the single promise returned from `Promise.all()` will immeditaely reject the with reason that promise rejected.This is sometimes referred to a *failing fast*.

```javascript
let myPromises = Promise.all([returnsPromOne(), returnsPromTwo(), returnsPromThree()]);

myPromises
  .then((arrayofValues) => {
    console.log(arrayOfValues);
  })
  .catch((rejectionReason) => {
    console.log(rejectionReason);
  });
```

