# Connecting Front-End to Back-End

## Transferring Data

- HTTP Requests

   Will include a method, or HTTP verb, a series of Headers that help to define the request, and (if necessary) a body.

- HTTP Response

   Includes a status indicator, and list of headers and often a body as well.

## Different Types of Rendering

Rendering happens through the construction of a *render tree*, essentially, the blueprint of the web page that we will eventually see. This rendering can happen on both the client-side and the server-side, or a mix of both called *hybrid* rendering.

*Client-side* rendering necessitates the client's receipt of all the logic and assets to dynamically render content on the page. While in server-side rendering, the assets are delivered after being dynamically chosen on the server through a series of requests.

## Client-Side Rendering

The browser delivers a boilerplate HTML document with an element that all of the content will be dynamically generated in. After the initial page load, any interactivity is handled by the user's browser, so as long as the computer can handle it the website should be very fast after that.

SEO can struggle, however, since no content is on the page until it is rendered.

## Server-side Rendering

For less interactive pages, server-side rendering is probably better. This is where views are prepared and are ready to render before they are delivered to the machine. This means that each successive page load will be quick, but JS can still weigh down the load times since all the assets must be loaded before the page is fully interactable.

