# Arrays

- **Arrays** are JavaScript's way of making lists.
- The list is ordered and they can store any data types.

```javascript
let concepts = ['creating arrays', 'array structures', 'array manipulation'];
```

### Create an Array

- An array is created with an **array literal**, which is wrapped in square brackets `[]` and each item inside the array is called an **element** and they are separated by commas.
- Arrays can be saved to a variable, as in the example above. `concepts` is a variable that now contains that array.

### Accessing Elements

- Every element has a position in the array called its **index**.
- JavaScript arrays are **zero-indexed** which means that they count up from `0` rather than `1`

```javascript
// index 0      index 1    index 2
let cities = ['New York', 'Beijing', 'Nairobi'];
```

- To access an element in an array, you can use brackets i.e. `cities[0]` will access `'New York'`
- You can also use bracket notation with strings, and it will access individual characters

### Update Elements

- Once an element has been accessed, its value can be updated using the same syntax that variables are updated.

### Arrays with let and const

- We can declare variables with assigned arrays with both `let` and `const`. However, `const` arrays can still have their elements changed -- a new array cannot be assigned to the name however.

### The .length property

- With variables `.length` will return the number of characters
- With arrays `.length` will return the number of elements.

### The .push() Method

- `.push()` allows you to append items to an array

```javascript
const itemTracker = ['item 0', 'item 1', 'item 2'];

itemTracker.push('item 3', 'item 4');

console.log(itemTracker);
// Output: ['item 0', 'item 1', 'item 2', 'item 3', 'item 4'];
```

- `.push()` is considered a **destructive method** because it changes or **mutates** the initial array.

### The .pop() Method

- `.pop()` removes the last item of an array.
- It doesn’t take any arguments.
- Returns the value of the item that it removed.
- Is a destructive method

### More Array Methods

- There are also methods that don't mutate arrays they're called **non-mutating array methods**
- Here are some other array methods built in:
   - `.join()`
   - `.slice()` - remove a section of an array by passing the starting and ending index as arguments into the method (ending index is not included, up until ending index)

         *non-mutating, the array stays intact*

   - `.splice()`
   - `.shift()` - remove the *first* item of an array
   - `.unshift()` - add an item the *beginning* of an array
   - `.concat()`
   - `.indexof` - returns the index number of the data that is passed to it as an argument

### Arrays and Functions

- Here's an example to illustrated the mutability of arrays and how that interacts with function scope:

```javascript
const flowers = ['peony', 'daffodil', 'marigold'];

function addFlower(arr) {
  arr.push('lily');
}

addFlower(flowers);

console.log(flowers); 
//Output: ['peony', 'daffodil', 'marigold', 'lily']
```

- When you pass an array into a function, if the array is mutated inside the function, that change will be maintained outside the function as well. This is explained sometimes as *pass-by-reference* since the name of the array is really a reference to where the mutable memory is being stored and edited.

### Nested Arrays

- Arrays can store arrays as well and they can be accessed like we access any other element in an array.

```javascript
const nestedArr = [[1], [2, 3]];

console.log(nestedArr[1]);
// Output: [2, 3]
```

- We can also access elements of the nested array by *chainging,* or adding on to the bracket notation with index values.

```javascript
console.log(nestedArr[1][0]);
// Output: 2
```

