# Loops

- A **loop** is a programming tool that repeats a set of instructions until a specified condition (called a *stopping condition*) is met.
- The term **iterate** in programming, referring to loops, just means “to repeat”

### Repeating Tasks Manually

```javascript
let vacationSpots = ['Florida', 'Italy', 'Los Angeles'];

console.log(vacationSpots[0]);
console.log(vacationSpots[1]);
console.log(vacationSpots[2]);
```

### The For Loop

- A `for` loop includes an *iterator variable* which is initialized and checked against the stopping condition, and assigned a new value on each loop iteration.
- `for` loops contain three expressions separated by a ;
   1. an *initialization* which starts the loop and also can declare the iterator variable
   2. a *stopping condition* that the iterator variable is evaluated against - `true` eval will cause another iteration, `false` will stop
   3. an *iteration statement* which will update the iterator variable on each loop.

```javascript
for (let counter = 0; counter < 4; counter++) {
  console.log(counter);
}
/* Output
0
1
2
3 */
```

   1. The initilization: `let counter = 0`, the loop will start counting at 0.
   2. The stopping condition `counter < 4`, stop the loop once this expression is false. In this case it will run the loop block while the counter variable is below 4.
   3. The iteration statement: `counter++`, after each loop this statement will run, the value of `counter` will increase by one in this case.
   4. The code block
- An example of the vacationsSpots above.

```javascript
let vacationSpots = ['Florida', 'Italy', 'Los Angeles'];

for (let counter = 0; counter < 3; counter++) {
  console.log(vacationSpots[counter]);
}
```

### Looping in Reverse

- We can have the looper count backwards as well by
   - setting the iterator variable at thie highest desired value,
   - setting the stopping condition to be less then the desired amount and
   - making the iterator decrease in intervals
- Think of the stopping condition as a *continuance condition*. It is a gate that must be true to continue on the loop.

### Looping Through Arrays

- We can use `for` loops to iterate through entire data structures!
- To loop through a whole array use the array’s `.length` property for its condition.
- The iterator variable is often named `i` when we're using it to iterate through arrays. It is shorthand for the word **index**

### Nested Loops

- We can run loops inside of other loops, called a **nested loop**.
- For each iteration of an outer loop, an inner loop will run completely.

### The While Loop

- Here are two loops that will do the same thing

```javascript
// A for loop that prints 1, 2, and 3
for (let counterOne = 1; counterOne < 4; counterOne++){
  console.log(counterOne);
}

// A while loop that prints 1, 2, and 3
let counterTwo = 1;
while (counterTwo < 4) {
  console.log(counterTwo);
  counterTwo++;
}
```

- `while` loop syntax
   - `counterTwo` variable is declared before the loop and it can be accessed inside the loop
   - `while` keyword starts the loop and the stopping condition, or *test condition* follows.
   - Next is the loop’s code block, and we increment the loop at the end of the loop.
      - If we forget to increment, then we will get an infinite loop.
- We tend to want to use `while` loops when we don't know exactly the number of iterations that we need!

Here’s a loops that will run an indefinite amount of times until the stopping condition stops the loop

```javascript
const cards = ['diamond', 'spade', 'heart', 'club'];

let currentCard;
while (currentCard !== 'spade') {
  currentCard = cards[Math.floor(Math.random() *4)];
  console.log(currentCard);
};
```

### Do…While Statements

- A `do` ... `while` statement says to do a task once, and then keep doing it until a specified condition is no longer met. Here is the syntax

```javascript
let countString = '';
let i = 0

do {
  countString = countString + i;
  i++;
} while (i < 5);

console.log(countString);
```

- `do` ... `while` is similar to `while` but `do` … `while` will run at least once regarless of the condition, but while will only run while the condition is true.

### The break Keyword

- The `break` keyword can end a loop before the stopping condition has been met.

```javascript
for (let i=0; i < 99; i++) {
  if (i > 2) {
    break;
  }
  console.log('Banana.');
}

console.log('Orange you glad I broke out of the loop!');
```

### The for…of Loop

- This is a substitution for the `for` loop introduced by the ES6 version that is specifically for iterating over an array.
- If you don’t need super fine contol, you can set a variable and iterate through an array in one line like this

```javascript
const strangeBirds = ['Shoebill', 'Cockatrice', 'Basan', 'Cow', 'Terrorbird', 'Parotia', 'Kakapo'];

for (const bird of strangeBirds) {
  console.log(bird);
}
```

   - This will iterate and log each and every bird in the array.
   - So if you’re performing an action on every item in an array, this is useful.
- `continue` is a keyword that will skip to the next iteration when it is interpreted.

