# Introduction to JavaScript

- JavaScript powers dynamic behavior on most websites.

### Console

- The console displays important messages to developers.
- We can make the computer print, or *log* things to our console
- The `console` keyword is an *object*, or a collection of data and actions that we can use
- Objects in JavaScript have actions
- One action (also called a method) built into `console` is the `.log()`  method. Using this, whatever we put in the parentheses gets printed.

```javascript
console.log(5);
```

- The above code will log `5` to the console.
- Each line, called a statement, is ended with a semi-colon.

### Comments

- A single line comment is denoted with `//`
- You can do it on it’s own line, or comment-out after a statement

```javascript
// Prints 5 to the console
console.log(5); // Prints 5
```

- A multi line comment is the same as CSS: `/*  */`
   - You can also use the multi-line comment in-line to make something in code stand out:
   - `console.log(/* IGNORED */ 5); // Still just prints 5`

### Data Types

- JavaScript has eight fundamental data types
   1. **Number**
   2. **BigInt**: Any number greater than 2^53 -1 or less than -(2^53-1), with n appended to the number: 1234567890123456n
   3. **String**: Any group of characters surrounded by single or double quotes. Single is preferred `‘…’`
   4. **Boolean**: Only two possible values, `true` `false` - think of this as an on-off switch or as answers to yes or no questions
   5. **Null**: Intentional absence of a value `null`
   6. **Undefined**: Also the absence of a value, but `undefined` means that a given value doesn't exist
   7. **Symbol**: A unique identifier, useful in more complex code
   8. **Object**: Collections of related data
- The first seven types are called *primitive data types*. They are the most basic.

### Arithmetic Operators

- An **operator** is a character that performs a task in code. **Arithmetic operators** perform mathematical calculations:
   - add `+`
   - subtract `-`
   - multiply `*`
   - divide `/`
   - remainder `%`
      - this operator is sometimes called *modulo*, it returns the number that is left after the right hand number divides the left hand number evenly

### String Concatenation

- When you use a `+` operator on two strings it will append the right string to the left.
- It will concatenate with no spaces, so if you want a space, you have to add that in: `console.log(‘I love to’ + ‘ ‘ + ‘code.’);`

### Properties

- Each new piece of data saves an *instance* to the browser. Each data type has properties that are passed to each *instance*.
- Every string has a `length` property - it is the number of characters in the string

```javascript
console.log('Hello'.length); // Prints 5
```

- The period `.` is another operator! It's called the *dot operator.*
- In the above example, the operator retrieves the value saved to the `length` property from the instance `‘Hello’`. That gives us 5.

### Methods

- Methods are actions we can perform
- Data types have access to methods that allow us to handle instances of data.
- We *call* —use—  a method by appending an instance with
   - a period (the dot operator)
   - the name of the method
   - opening and closing parentheses

```javascript
'example string'.methodName()
```

Take `console.log()` as an example:

```javascript
// Call console object
console
//dot operator
console.
//name of method, and paraentheses
console.log()
```

Here are some example string methods:

```javascript
console.log('hello'.toUpperCase()); // Prints 'HELLO'
console.log('Hey'.startsWith('H')); // Prints true
```

- `toUpperCase()`  is called on the string instance `'hello'` and logs the result in the console.
- `starsWith()`  is called on the string instance `‘Hey’`. The method accepted the character `‘H’` as an input, or *argument.* Since the string does start with the character provided in the argmument, the result printed to the console is `true`.
- A list of built-in string methods are available in documentation.
- **JAVASCRIPT *IS* CASE SENSITIVE**
   - But most everything is in camelCase

### Built-in Objects

- There are objects other than `console` that are built into JS. We will eventually also create our own objects.
- Mathematical operations that are more complext than basic arithmetic can be performed using the `Math` object.
   - `console.log(Math.random());` Prints a random number between 0 and 1
   - If you wanted to print a random number between 0 and 50 you can: `Math.random() * 50;`
   - Since this will be a decimal we can use another method that will round down to the nearest whole number `Math.floor()`
      - `Math.floor()` drops everything after the decimal.
      - `Math.ceil()` is like floor, but it brings it up to the next whole number, always rounding up.
      - There is also a `Math.round()` which will go to the nearest integer.
```javascript
Math.floor(Math.random() * 50);
```

   - This won’t print anything though
```javascript
console.log(Math.floor(Math.random() *50));
```

[](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/javascript)

[](https://www.codecademy.com/workspaces/new)

