# Conditional Statements

### What are Conditional Statements?

- A **conditional statement** checks specific conitions and performas a task based on the conditions

### If Statement

```javascript
if (true) {
  console.log('This message will print!'); 
}
// Prints: This message will print!
```

- `if` keyword followed by parentheses in turn followed by a *code block* also called a *block statement* in curly braces.
- Inside the prentheses, a condition is provided that evaluates to `true` or `false`
- If the condition is `true` then the code in the curly braces *executes.*
- If the condition is `false` this it won’t.

### If…Else Statemets

- We can change the default behavior of an `if` statement (change what it does when the condition is false.

```javascript
if (false) {
  console.log('The code in this block will not run.');
} else {
  console.log('But the code in this block will!');
}
```

- `else` **must** be paired with an `if` statement
- it too is wrapped in curlies
- This allows us to automate *binary decisions* - or decisions with only two outcomes, like a yes or a no.

### Comparison Operators

> Less than: `<`

> Greater than: `>`

> Less than or equal to: `<=`

> Greater than or equal to: `>=`

> Is equal to: `===`

> Is not equal to: `!===`

- Comparison operators compare the value on the left with the value on the right.

```javascript
10 < 12 // evaluates to true
'apples' === 'oranges' // evaluates to false
```

- The *identity operator* (`===`) checks if the value on the left is the same as the one on the right.

### Logical Operators

- Conditionals work with booleans, we also have operators that work with boolean values; they are called **logical operators**.

> the *and* operator `&&`

> the *or* operator `||`

> the *not* operator, otherwise known as the *bang* operator `!`

- We could use these to check whether two things or true, or run code if only one condition is true, or when a condition is *not* true.

```javascript
true && false; // evaluates to false
true || false; // evaluates to true
!true; // evaluates to false
!false // evaluates to true
```

### Truthy and Falsy

- Sometimes we may not want to check if a variable has a *specific* value, just see if it has a value, or exists at all.

```javascript
let myVariable = 'I Exist!';

if (myVariable) {
   console.log(myVariable)
} else {
   console.log('The variable does not exist.')
}
```

- In this scenerio `myVariable` has a **truthy** value, meaning that that it will evaluate to `true` in a conditional context even though it is not a boolean.
- There are also **falsy** values, meaning that they will evaluate to `false` in a conditional context:
   - `0`
   - Empty strings `'‘` (a space counts as truthy, must be empty)
   - `null`
   - `undefined`
   - `NaN` Not a Number

### Truthy and Falsy Assignment

- This allows for shorthand. Look at the following examples which will produce the same output:

```javascript
let username = '';
let defaultName;

if (username) {
  defaultName = username;
} else {
  defaultName = 'Stranger';
}

console.log(defaultName); // Prints: Stranger
```

```javascript
let username = '';
let defaultName = username || 'Stranger';

console.log(defaultName); // Prints: Stranger
```

- The *or* operator used in the second example will check the left condition first. If `username` is assigned, it will be *truthy* so it will be assigned to `defaultName`. If it is empty, as above then `username` is falsy, meaning that `'stranger'` will be assigned since it is *truthy*.
- This is referred to as a ***short-circuit evaluation.***

### Ternary Operator

- A **ternary operator** is another short-hand in JavaScript for conditionals

```javascript
let isNightTime = true;

if (isNightTime) {
  console.log('Turn on the lights!');
} else {
  console.log('Turn off the lights!');
}
```

Here the ternary operator will perform the same function

```javascript
isNightTime ? console.log('Turn on the lights!') : console.log('Turn off the lights!');
```

- The condition `isNightTime` is provided before the `?`
- Two expressions follow that are separated by a `:`
- If the condition evals `true`, the the first expression executes
- If `false`, the second.

### Else If Statements

- This is how we will add more outcomes to our conditional.

```javascript
let stopLight = 'yellow';

if (stopLight === 'red') {
  console.log('Stop!');
} else if (stopLight === 'yellow') {
  console.log('Slow down.');
} else if (stopLight === 'green') {
  console.log('Go!');
} else {
  console.log('Caution, unknown!');
}
```

### The switch keyword

- `else if` works fine, but it is not great for large numbers of values.
- This is where `switch` comes in to provide an alternative syntax

```javascript
let groceryItem = 'papaya';

switch (groceryItem) {
  case 'tomato':
    console.log('Tomatoes are $0.49');
    break;
  case 'lime':
    console.log('Limes are $1.49');
    break;
  case 'papaya':
    console.log('Papayas are $1.29');
    break;
  default:
    console.log('Invalid item');
    break;
}

// Prints 'Papayas are $1.29'
```

- `switch` keyword initiates the statement followed by the value that each `case` will compare, the value or *expression* of this statement is `GroceryItem`
- Inside the curlies are multiple `case`s that check if the expression matches the specified value. The first `case` has the value `'tomato’` so if the expression's value is also `'tomato'` then the following `console.log()` will run.
- Given the value of `groceryItem` the third `case` will run.
- `break;` tells the computer to stop executing. If we don't have the `break;` then every `case` following the trigger will execute as well
- After the last `case` there is a `default` statement that will display if none of the `case` statements return `true`

