# Scope

### Scope

- Scope defines where variables can be accessed or referenced.
- Global scope can be accessed from anywhere, but local scope keeps variables in specific contexts.

### Blocks and Scope

- A block is a set of code in curlies `{}` like what we used in `if` statements

### Global Scope

- Think about scop in relation to blocks.
- Variables can be declared inside and outside of blocks.
- *Global scope* is where vairables are declared outside of blocks. These can be accessed by any code in the program.

```javascript
const color = 'blue';

const returnSkyColor = () => {
  return color; // blue
};

console.log(returnSkyColor()); // blue
```

- The `color` variable is defined outside of the block, but it can be accessed within the function block. -- This variable has *global scope*

### Block Scope

- Variables defined inside of a code block have *block scope*, meaning that they are only accessible to the lines of code within that block.
- Varibles with *block scope*, are also called *local variables*.

```javascript
const logSkyColor = () => {
  let color = 'blue';
  console.log(color); // Prints "blue"

};

logSkyColor(); // Prints "blue"
cosole.log(color); // throws a ReferenceError
```

### Scope Pollution

- Have too many global variables can cause problems in a program.
- When a variable is declared it goes to the *global namespace* where the variable remains until the program finishes, which menas that the global namespace can fll up quickly.
- *Scope pollution* is when we have too many global variables that exist in the global namespace, or when we reuse variables across different scopes. -- globally scoped variables can colllide with locally scoped variables and this can cause unexpected bahavior
- Here’s an example of scope pollution

```javascript
let num = 50;

const logNum = () => {
  num = 100; // Take note of this line of code
  console.log(num);
};

logNum(); // Prints 100
console.log(num); // Prints 100
```

   - In the `logNum()` function, the programmer meant to define a new `num` variable but didn't use the `let` keyword. JS has no problem letting this program rewrite the global `num` variable, but the programmer will likely be surprised when the code prints a new value for `num`

### Practice Good Scoping

- We should *tightly scope* our variables. Meaning to make them accessible to the least amount of our code possible while still accomplishing the desired output.
- This accomplishes a few things:
   - Makes code more legible since you will have more discrete blocks.
   - Makes code easier to interpret since everything that is associated is close together.
   - Makes code easier to maintain since it is modular.
   - Saves memory since variables will be purged once the block finishes running.

```javascript
const logSkyColor = () => {
  const dusk = true;
  let color = 'blue';
  if (dusk) {
    let color = 'pink';
    console.log(color); // Prints "pink"
  }
  console.log(color); // Prints "blue"
};

console.log(color); // throws a ReferenceError
```

