# Going Off-Platform with JavaScript

### Running JavaScript in the Browser Console

- JS is usually added to HTML using `<script>` elements. But, most web browsers also provide a developer console that will allow you to write, edit and execute JS directly (typically for testing and debugging.
- The console on a browser is a REPL typically (read-eval-print-loop). Which is an environment that takes single user inputs, executes them and returns a result. The command line is also a REPL.
- Doing this allows us to run JS within the context of the page, modifying the page’s DOM.
- Either 'Inspect Element' and navigate to the console, or go to Developer tools and pick the JavaScript console from there.
- The browser console will automatically return to the user. So simple arethmetic is easy, and using the `Math` object is also easy. Logging something to the console still automatically returns something, and since the string isn't returned, an undefined value is returned.
- We can also write functions in the console. But, since a function declaration doesn’t return anything unless it is called, it also returns a undefined value.
- Up to this point, we have been operating independent of the page, but we can also interact with the DOM.
- You can run `document.body.innerHTML` to check the page body content, or edit it
   - `document.body.innerHTML = "<h1>Adding a heading using JS</h1>"`
- `$()` or `document.querySelector()` this close to jQuery syntax and it allows us to manipulate the DOM more efficently.
```javascript
document.body.innerHTML = "<h1>Adding a heading using JS</h1>"

$("body").style.color = "blue"
```

- This is just like editing HTML in the DOM, all of the changes are temporary and will delete after refreshing.

### Introduction to JavaScrip Runtine Environments

- A **runtime environment**  is where code is executed, determining what global objects your program can access and impacting how it runs.

#### A Browser’s Runtime Environment

- If we embed JS into an HTML document and open it in our browser, the JS will execute in the browser's runtime environment. This used to be the only place for JS to executed.
- An application created for and executed in the browser is known as a *front-end* application. To create *back-end applications* we will need to use other languages
- `window.alert();` will open a popup window. It takes other methods too `.prompt()` `.confirm()`

#### The Node Runtime Environment

- The *Node runtime environment* will execute JS without a browser, allowing *full-stack* applications using only JS
- Browser-environment data values and functions (like `window.alert()` can't be used.
- Here is a JavaScript command executed in Node that will allow us to check where a file called `my-app.js` is located
```javascript
// my-app.js
console.log(process.env.PWD);
```

   - `process` - an object containing data relating to the JS file being executed
   - `process.env` is an object containing environment variables such as:
   - `process.env.PWD` which is ‘Print Working Directory’

[](https://www.codecademy.com/article/setting-up-node-locally)

- We can execute JS in this file, but we have to set up Node on our computer and then run the following command in the terminal.

```other
$ node my-app.js
/path/to/working/directory
```

   - `node` command tells the computer to execute the following argument “my-app.js” in the node environment
   - You can run `node` without an argument which will open Node's REPL
   - Something good to know is that the terminal needs to be working in the same directory as the file

