# Acing the Technical Interview

## What is a technical interview?

In a technical interview, a company will test your knowledge by having you perform a technical task. Something like:

- debugging existing code
- building a small project
- adding a featrue to an existing code base
- explaining the design and architecture of a technical problem

It’s not necessarily about *getting it right*, more often it's about your *thought process*.

## Preparing for a technical interview

1. Ask questions leading up to your interview

Ask what to expect, what technologies are used by the team, or ask about what some of the things they’ll be looking for on the technical interview will be.

1. Master your programming languages

Knowing the ins and outs of your preferred languages can be a slam dunk. They will typically allow you to choose which language you’d like to use in the interview.

1. Practice with projects and coding challenges

Actually go though real challenges and try to solve them on your own while explaining the thought behind them. There are samples for Python, Java and Javascript on Codecademy.

1. Memorize a story that illustrates your skill

Go over problems you encountered and the solutions that you found while working on a project. Be ready with this when asked about prior experience.

## How to Pass a Technical Interview

1. Understand the problem

Ask questions, make sure that you understand what you’re doing before writing code.

1. Explain your approach

Identify your core goal and generate a step by step process that you can explain out loud to the interviewer. Never stop explaining as you work. Even in a problem, explain your thought process. The interviewer may even help you out.

1. Optimize your solution

Once it works, go back to analyze your code. Is it DRY? Single responsibility? Discuss Big-O notation if you’re familiar with it.

## Sample Interview Questions

[7 HTML interview questions to practice](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/blog/html-interview-questions/?utm_source=ccblog&utm_medium=ccblog&utm_campaign=ccblog&utm_content=technical_interview_guide_blog)

[7 Top CSS Interview Questions to Practice](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/blog/css-interview-questions/?utm_source=ccblog&utm_medium=ccblog&utm_campaign=ccblog&utm_content=technical_interview_guide_blog)

[JavaScript interview questions | Technical interview prep](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/blog/javascript-interview-questions/?utm_source=ccblog&utm_medium=ccblog&utm_campaign=ccblog&utm_content=technical_interview_guide_blog)

