# Intro to JSX

### Why React?

- React was developed by engineers at Facebook
- React is used because its
   - fast
   - modular
   - scalable
   - flexible
   - popular

### Use React in your files

```javascript
import React from 'react';
import { createRoot } from 'react-dom/client'
```

### What is JSX?

```javascript
const h1 = <h1>Hello world</h1>;
```

- The part here that looks like HTML, the `<h1>` tag, is called *JSX.*
- JSX isn’t calid JavaScript, it is a “syntax extension"
- You will need a JSX complier to make this work

### JSX Elements

- A basic unit of JSX is an element
- It’s HTML

### JSX Elements and their Surroundings

- Use a JSX element like an *expression*.
- Store them in variables or in objects, etc.

### Attributes in JSX

- Add attributes in the same way as in HTML

### Nested JSX

- Nest objects the same way as in HTML including whitespace
- If you are going to make a multiple line JSX expression you must wrap it in parentheses

```javascript
const theExample = (
  <a href="#">
    <h1>
      Click me!
    </h1>
  </a>
)
```

### JSX Outer Elements

- JSX expressions may only have *one* outermost element.
- First opening tag and last closing tag must be to the same element.
- Nest as much as you want though.
- Just wrap whatever you’re doing in a `<div>` element though to get around this.

### Rendering JSX

```javascript
const container = document.getElementById('app');
const root = createRoot(container);
root.render(<h1>Hello world</h1>);
```

- React relies on two things in rendering: *what* content and *where* to place it.
- This code:
   - Stores an element on the HTML with the `id` of `app` in the variable `container`
   - Uses `createRoot()` from the `react-dom/client` library to create a React root from the variable `container` and stores this in the variable `root`
      - This is *where to place the content*
   - The last line uses the `render()` method of `root` to pass an `<h1>` JSX element
      - This is the *what to render*

### Passing a Variable to render()

- As long as the variable evaluates to a JSX expression, you can pass it as an argument to `render()`

### The Virtual DOM

- `render()` only updates DOM elements that have changed! So if you double execute `render()` with the same argument, the second call won't do anything.
- This uses React’s virtual DOM

