# Your First React Component

- Compnenets are reusable chunks of code that are responsible for one job, often to render HTML and re-render when data changes.

```javascript
import React from 'react';
import ReactDOM from 'react-dom/client';

function MyComponent() {
  return <h1>Hello world</h1>;
}

ReactDOM.createRoot(
document.getElementById('app')
).render(<MyComponent />);
```

### Import React

- Our first component is the import of the `React` object. This object contains the methods that we need to use the React library.
- `’react'` is the package we import from. It must be installed in your project as a dependency.
- `App.js` is typically the top-level of the application
- `index.js` is typically the entry point

### Import ReactDOM

- We also need the object `ReactDOM` which has methods that interact with the DOM
- We’ll import it from `’react-dom’`
- `’react’` methods do not deal with the DOM
- So we’d only import `react-dom` at the entry point

### Create a Function Component

- Componenets used to have to be defined by JavaScript classes, but now it is typical to define them using functions, creating functional components - as in the above example.

### Function Component Instructions

- A function component essentially works as a factory that generates instances based on the function when called.
- When we create a function component we do it in PascalCase: UpperCamelCase
- What sits in the function body is a set of instructions on how to create a React element. Even though it looks like a regular expression with some JSX

### The Return Keyword in Functional Componenets

- Instructions in the function body can include combinatinos of markup, CSS, and JS to produce the desired result.
- We must *always* include a `return` statement.
- A functional component is expected to produce JSX that will render something on screen.
- We must `return` a JSX element.

### Importing and Exporting React Components

- So far we've been creating a component in `App.js` , the top level, but we need to export it from there so that it is accessible in our entry point `index.js`
- We can keep our component pieces separated, organized, and reusable by putting them into separate files and exporting them to where we need them.

```javascript
export default MyComponent;
```

```javascript
import MyComponent from './App';
```

### Using and Rendering a Component

- Call componenets using self-closing HTML-like structure

```javascript
<MyComponent />
  <OtherComponent />
<MyComponent>
```

- We still need to use `.createRoot()` and `.render()` from the `react-dom` library in our entry-point to view them

```javascript
ReactDOM.createRoot(document.getElementById('app'));
```

- First use `.createRoot()` to create a React root container fro displaying content.
   - Typically one single root DOM node, and everything inside is managed by React DOM
   - Give `createRoot` a DOM element to render in, and React takes over from there
- After the root, call the render() method

```javascript
ReactDOM.createRoot(document.getElementById('app')).render(<MyComponent />);
```

