# API Design Guide

## Defining API Design and Why It Matters

API design is the collection of iterative decisions that create a concrete plan for developing, implementing and maintaining an API. This involves satisfying stakeholders, end-users and having a solid plan for developers.

A well-planned API design will save time and resources further down the line, and will increase the effectiveness of the implementation, allow for development that doesn’t repeat steps and is concise, and to shorten the time needed to create useful documentation.

## Characteristics of a Well-Designed API

- Easy to read and work with
- Hard to misuse - less error-prone
- Complete *and* concise - the "completeness" of the API just means that it exposes everything that it says it does, the final product may still take time to build
- Well documented - The full functionality of the API should be accessible to developers or users
- Reliable - referring to uptime, should not be arbrarily unavailable

## Collections, Resources, and Their URLs

### Nouns Are Your Best Friend

For each resource and collection that needs to be accessed by the API, the URL sould be simple and consistent so that developing is more straightforward and less error prone.

In the case of a fake photos app, imagine these two endpoints to get all photos and to get a single photo:

- `/retrieveEveryPhoto`
- `/getSinglePhoto/1`

These are inconsistent, and whle they are… clear… they will be hard to remember and work with compared to the equally clear, but much more consistent:

- `/photos`
- `/photos/1`

As far as plurality goes, there is no uniform rule, only that you should establish consistency across each project.

### Describe Resource Functionality with HTTP Methods

Using the HTTP methods will offer the most concise and clear way to communicate what each method does to a developer. Imagine the following documentation:

> \#1 Update an existing resource

> Endpoint: `/photos/34`

> \#2 Update an existing resource

> Endpoint: `/photos/34`

Compared to

> **PUT** `/photos/:id`

> Update an existing resource.

> **PATCH** `/photos/:id`

> Update an existing resource.

The second is far more clear with what the operation is at the endpoint, and all of the HTTP documentation stands behind the HTTP words that you use, rather than your own explaination.

## Responses

### Give Feedback to Help Developers Succeed

While a developer is working with an API, they are going to hit a lot of errors and a lot of successes. As an API designer, you need to validate both experiences, both with status codes and informative messages.

Find the balance between communicating the errors and being concise and sharp with language. You should be informative and incisive.

The three categories of code, and how developers interpret them are:

1. 4xx - the client application did something wrong
2. 5xxx - the api behaved incorrectly
3. 2xx - there was a successful communication with the API and client

