# API Documentation Best Practices

## Who is the API Documentation For?

APIs are typically built to solve a real-world problem that is faced by companies in a specific industry to be integrated into applications.

They two primary audiences are **decision-makers**, and **users**. The decision-makers are evaluating the api for their specific use case, and the users are the ones that are implementing the api.

Documentation needs to be written with both technical and non-technical users in mind.

## Best Practices in API Documentation

- Detailed error messages: explain potential errors and the use-cases involved and provide solutions
- A list of all exposed resources
- A terms of use agreement: how can the API be used, does it have any limits, what constraints are placed on the usage of the API, and what is the penalty for violating these restraints
- A changelog: what changed and when, and what is the stability of the API
- Less Technical Jargon: if terms are needed, link out to other documentation that will further explain the terms
- Examples of all Requests and Responses: what should a successful call return? What is the makeup of the objects that come back? Descirbe every supported format
- An Authentication guide: if there is authentication, this should be a dedicated section. If an end user has to authenticate before getting access to the API make sure that the process is tutorialized.

## Arm Documentation with Resources

- A Getting Started guide: a tutorialized guide that allows a user to begin working with your API instantly
- SDKs and Libraries: *Software Development Kit* - a set of libraries or tools that end-users can work with out of the box - Can improve adoption of the API
- An Interactice Console: An interactive window that interacts directly with your API allowing end users to try things out so that developers can see the value quickly

