# Accessible Design

### Introduction

- Contrast is one of the main tools designers ahve to draw people's attention to parts of the site that they want to highlight, and make sure that their site is accessible to people with vision impairments.

### Contrast

- Contrast is the opposition of different properties (color, size, shape, font, etc) to make one object visually distinct from another.
- Contrast not only helps people with visual impairments read what is on your site, but also helps people see what is important on your site at a glance.

### Introduction to Headings

- A website isn't a book, people need to get around easier, opt for headings and subheadings to break things up.

### Headings Hierarchy

- Use heading elements in order, and don't skip over heading elements.
- So <h1> is always most important, and if there is a heading on that page, then use h2 (not h4 next).
- Every page should have ONLY ONE H1 element.
- H1 is the document label

### Font Accessibility

- Accesible websites use real text instead of images of text with high contrast as its background with highly legible font sizes
- Use real text:
   - screen readers can read it aloud
   - users can scale real text without losing quality
   - less taxing on the browser than loading images
- Use contrasting colors:
   - Web Content Accessibility Guidelines reccommends a ration of at least **4.5 : 1**
      - The lighter color must have four and a half times the luminance of its paired darker color.
   - If you have less contrast you can use larger font sizes! (24px) (3:1)
   - Here’s a contrast checker:

[](https://webaim.org/resources/contrastchecker/)

- Font sizes:
   - Standard font size for most browsers is 16px
   - Smaller should be for nonessential font or design aesthetic

### Color Accessibility

- If text is too contrasted it can cause strain after time reading, and if it's too similar then it will be difficult to read.

### Color Blindness

- To help people with color deficencies, you can choose colors that are completely contrasting.
- Use a color scheme with multiple shades of brightness for a single color. This helps with total color blindness.
- The most general solution is pairing color with other forms of conveying information. Red cannot be the *only* signifier of an error.
- Here’s a colorblind page tester:

[](https://www.toptal.com/designers/colorfilter)

### Best Practices

- Text Overlaid on Images
   - Contrast will likely be too low.
   - Add a dark transparent overlay between the image and the text to increase visibility.
- Removing Input Labels
   - Looks cool, but placeholder text is low contrast and is not often read by screen readers
- Buttons and Links
   - Flat design can actually increase usability in some instances.
   - Don’t take minimalism so far that a user may not know how to navigate your site.
   - Color alone cannot be used to indicate clickability.

“Font Awesome” is a font library that contains lots of fonts and icons.

