# Authenitcation vs Authorization vs Encryption

### Authentication

Authentication is the checking of *who you are*. The authentication of who someone is relies on *factors* that verify identify. There are three primary types of verification factors:

- **Knowledge**: Something that only you **know**, like a username and password
- **Possession**: Something that only you **have**, like a security card or a mobile device
- **Inheritance**: Something that only you **are**, like a biometric data

If only one of these factors is used to identify you successuflly, this is considered *single-factor authentication*, and it is also considered relatively insecure. More and more, we are requiring the need for *Multi-Factor Authentication*, meaning that not only will you have to verify one factor, but you will have to prove who you are in an additional way.

### Authorization

Authorization is granting of permissions for *what you are allowed to do*. This is important to keep users on a site from accessing things that aren't theirs, or changing things that we don't want changed.

Good authorization allows users to see and access only the groups and resources that they need, and nothing that they don’t. Lazy authorization is the reason for countless web vulnerabilities.

### Encryption

Encryption enables Authentication and Authorization in a secure way. Encryption is the transformation of data into unreadable data that requires a **key** to decipher or decrypt it.

*Symmetrical Data Encryption* - The same key is used on both ends of the transfer to encrypt and decrypt the data.

*Asymmetrical Data Encryption* - Separate keys are used for encryption and decryption.
