# Security-Related HTTP Headers

The HTTP headers section is for lots of metadata about the information, but it is also where you will find headers dedicated to security information, like how that information should be transferred and handled by the client. These are put in place to protect the web application, server, and the client from malicious actors.

## Common Security Headers

### Strict-Transportation-Security

- Enforces HTTPS by making that version the only one available.
- Primary fends off man in the middle attacks possible on HTTP connections

```other
Strict-Transport-Security: max-age=31536000; includeSubDomains
```

- This tells the browser that the entire site, including the subdomains is HTTPS-only through the `includeSubdomains` value.
- The `max-age` field tells the browser to remember this for a year (number of seconds) which reduces redirect responses in the future

### Content-Security Policy

- Defines an allowlist of sources of content. Restricts access to resources that the browser can load on the current webpage.
- Primarily prevents XSS

```other
Content-Security-Policy: script-src 'self';
```

- `script-src` restricts where JS can be loaded from. `self` indicates the browser can only run from the current domain

### X-Frame-Options

- Controls and can stop a page from being hidden in an `<iframe>`  element.
- Prevents *clickjacking*, where an attacker loads your page in an iframe and hides the element using CSS, and tricks a user into clicking on and sending a request to your page.

```other
# Can't be hidden in an iframe anywhere
X-Frame-Options: DENY

# Can be in an iframe only on your domain
X-Frame-Options: SAMEORIGIN

# Can be in an iframe on the allowed domains listed
X-Frame-Options: ALLOW-FROM https://example.com
```

### Other Common Headers

[X-Content-Type-Options - HTTP | MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/X-Content-Type-Options)

[Referrer-Policy - HTTP | MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Referrer-Policy)

[OWASP Secure Headers Project | OWASP Foundation](https://owasp.org/www-project-secure-headers/)

[HTTP headers - HTTP | MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers#security)

## How to Add Security Headers

- Headers can be added differently based on the type of web server that you're using, they can be added by the server itself. However, in some of my own work, I know that they can be set through express as well, perhaps, not as reliably though.

### nginx

Add the following to the nginx server's config file to add this to all HTTP responses

```other
add_header strict-transport-security 'max-age=31536000; includeSubDomains always;'
```

### Apache

add the following to `/etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf`

```other
Header always set Strict-Transport-Security "max-age=31536000; includeSubDomains"
```

### Microsoft IIS

Add these to the `Web.config` file's `<httpProtocol>` section

```other
<system.webServer>
  ...

  <httpProtocol>
    <customHeaders>
      <add name="Content-Security-Policy" value="default-src 'self';" />
    </customHeaders>
  </httpProtocol>

  ...
</system.webServer>
```

## Checking Security Headers

You can check which security headers are active on your web address by using the following site:

[Analyse your HTTP response headers](https://securityheaders.com/)

