# JSON Web Tokens (JWTs)

A JSON Web Token is a JSON object that is securely shared between two devices using a public/private key pair encryption. Each JSON Web Tokens have 1) a header 2) a payload and 3) a signature.

## Header

Contains the *type* and the *signing algorithm*.

- For JWT the type will always be "JWT"
- Media type is "application/jwt"
- Signing or hashing algorithms may vary
   - HMAC-SHA256: "HS256"
   - RSA with SHA-256: "RW256"
   - ECDSA with SHA-256: "ES256"

```other
{
  'alg': 'HS256', 
  'typ': 'JWT'
}
```

## Payload

- The payload contains claims about an entity. A claim is a statement or piece of information and an entity is often a user.
- Three types of claims:
   - Registered: predefined claims types that anyone can use in a JWT
   - Public: custom claim types created by a developer that can be used publicly. Should be registered. AKA repeated claims
   - Private: custom claim types that are not registered or pulic. Used only between parties that have agreed to use them.

Payload with common registered claims

```other
{
 'sub': '1234567890',
 'name': 'Harine Cooper',
 'admin': false,
 'iat': 1620924478,
 'exp': 1620939187
}
```

## Signature

- Used to verify that the JWT wasn't tampered with, created using the encrypted header, payload, secret and hashing algorithm.
- The secret is a symmetric key known by the sender and the receiver of the token.

## How Do We Use a JWT?

### Properly Storing a JWT

How is this information used?

1. User logs into a website by sending their information to the server.
2. The server creates a JWT with a secret.
3. The JWT is returned to the browser.
4. The user makes another request, and the browser sends the JWT back to the server in the Authorization header using the Bearer schema:

```other
Authorization: Bearer eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJzdWIiOiIxMjM0NTY3ODkwIiwibmFtZSI6IkhhcmluZSBDb29wZXIiLCJhZG1pbiI6ZmFsc2UsImlhdCI6MTYyMDkyNDQ3OCwiZXhwIjoxNjIwOTM5MTg3fQ.3B-FLgPETrExxlDKW30AoU7KGE6xuZodw79TQR8_mwM
```

5. Server verifies the JWT signature and gets user information from the JWT.
6. The server will send a response back to the browser. Response content is dependent on whether or not the JWT was valid.

### Improper Storage

- DO NOT store JWT in localStorage

## Why Use JWTs?

What are they used for?

- Authorization
- Information Exchange

Why use them?

- Parsing JSON is easier
- JWTs are small, scale well and are easier for mobile devices to process

