# Securing Sensitive Data

- Sensitive Data Exposure is on OWASP's list of the top ten most critical secuirty risks to web applications.

## Encryption

Cryptography is the science of hiding data that is intended to be revealed again. We can perform encryption and decryption by using a special key.

   - Symmetric encryption - the same key is used in the encryption and decryption process
   - Asymmetric encryption - two different keys are used to encrypt and decrypt data.

### Symmetric Encryption

- Fastest and most common form of encryption
- If someone gets your key then they have your data

### Asymmetric Encryption

- Key pair made up of a public and a private key
   - Public key: give to anyone and only used to encrypt data
   - Private key: kept secret and only used to decrypt data
- If your private key is kept private then no one can read your sensitive data.
- Slower and more complex, so it's typically used on smaller pieces of data.

## Hashing

Hashing is different from encryption in that it is a *one-way* process. The original data is run through a function to create a unique hashed value. The original value cannot be computed from the hash.

Each different input is supposed to generate a unique value, but it is theoretically possible to have a *hash collision*, where two different inputs generate the same hash. The algorithms that we use today have so many unique possible values that it is functionally impossible that this would happen though. It happened more often with older hashing algorithms though.

### Using Hashes to Protect Data

- Hashes are used to store passwords typically to protect the information from breaches

## Encoding

Encoding sounds like it might be encryption, but it doesn't actually hide any data. It is the transformation of data into a form that can be used by a different system.

Here are some types of encoding:

- ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange)
- Unicode
- Base64

ASCII is a character encoding system that allows computers to read and display characters more familiar to us. See the following chart.

| Letter | Decimal Encoding | Binary Encoding |
| ------ | ---------------- | --------------- |
| A      | 65               | 100 0001        |
| B      | 66               | 100 0010        |
| C      | 67               | 100 0011        |

- Encoded information is very easily reversed, you only need to know the algorithm.

## Obfuscation

This is less of a data security word and more about securing code. Obfuscation is the act of intentionally hiding the meaning of something by making it difficult to understand. This is useful if trade secrets or intellectual property need to be hidden. Obfuscation can also make it harder for users to hack software or get around licensing requirements needed to use programs.

Malicious actors will also use obfuscation to make it hard for users or antivirus software to detect malicious software.

