# Recursion

Recursion is a problem solving method that involves the calling of a function within the function itself. It can be a more efficient way of performing evaluations that require iterations.

Recursive problem solving involves conditionally calling a function to get you to a final solution. It involves solving problems by defining the problem in terms of itself.

Take this pseudo-code example of a recursive function:

```plaintext
define function, speller
  if there are no more letters
    print "all done"
  print the first letter
  invoke speller with the given name minus the first letter
```

This is a recursive function because *speller* is called within itself.

## Parts of a Recursive Function

### Base Case

This is the condition under which we are NOT calling the function.

```plaintext
if there are no more letters
    print "all done"
```

### Perform Your Operation

This is where we solve *a piece of the problem*. The point is that, eventually we won't be able to perform this action, we will run out of letters.

```plaintext
print the first letter
```

### Recursive Step

This is where we call the function again

```plaintext
invoke speller with the given name minus the first letter
```

### Caveat

We could, in fact, solve this problem iteratively as well

```plaintext
define function, speller
  for each letter in the name argument
    print the letter
  print "all done"
```

## Call Stack and Execution Frames

When we perform recursive functions, we are adding the same function call many times to the call stack, since each subsequent time we are calling the function within itself, we are awaiting a value. This is intuitive when we see a different function get called inside of a function, our initial call must wait for the the value to be computed before it continues executing.

It is important that a base case be reached, otherwise the call stack will continue to be filled infinitely.

In contrast to iterative approaches, instead of a counting variable, we will use the argument of the function to do our counting!

