# Transport Layer Security

## What is TLS?

TLS is a protocol for securing transport-layer communications, or the transmission of data between distant devices. It is the technology that enables HTTPS and it handled encryption alorithms, though it is not encryption itself.

A TLS connection between a client and a server is often conceptualized as a tunnel.

TLS uses public-key certificates to sign and verify communications.

## TLS vs. SSL

Secure Sockets Layer is the predecessor to TLS. The certificates used by TLS are the same type of certificates, but SSL has many known vulnerabulities now. SSL’s last version was officially deprecated in 2015.

Since the certificates were the same, sometimes the terms are used interchangeably. So if you hear someone talking about SSL/TLS certificates, or even SSL certificates, odds are that they are referring to TLS.

## How TLS Works

A TLS connection is accomplished through a handshake process between the client and the server. Though the process will vary, the typical steps this handshake must go though are:

1. The client sends a "hello" message to the server with supported protocols, encryption suites and the *client random*, a random string of data.
2. The server sends back a message with the chosen suite, its SSL/TLS certificate and the *server random*, a random string of data.
3. The client uses the server’s certificate to authenticate the server.
4. The client and the server exchange a *premaster secret* (the transmission of this will vary based on the encryption suite). Once the server and client have their matching premaster secret, it is used in combination with the client random and the server random to generate keys.
5. Client and server send messagges to eachother to test the connection.

The certificates that a server has are signed through a certificate authority to verify their authenticity. A client can check with these third party certificate authorities to verify. This is called a *public key infrastructure* or (PKI).

## Conclusion

TLS is not just a “nice-to-have” but rather a “need-to-have” on the modern internet. When deploying a web application or website, it is a priority that is is set up on your server. Modern browsers will flag any website that is not served over https or has outdated TLS certificates.

