# Role-Based Access Control

RBAC or Role-Based Access Control is a system of authorization that provides a layer between permissions and users. This is used in physical security as well as cyber security. In RBAC, permissions are not granted directly to users, but rather to roles and the roles are assigned to users.

## Roles

Roles are entetites that can be given permissions and can in turn be assigned to users. Users can then accept multiple roles to take on additional permissions.

## Why RBAC?

It organizes the permissions process making it more streamlined and less error-prone. Giving access to software to a large number of people, even everyone in the company, is much easier using roles. If all employees have an `employee` role, then you only need to add the access one time, and all employees will have the permissions update.

When we are doing tedious, person-by-person permissions update, mistakes will be made and permissions will be forgotten. This will open the door to Broken Access Control.

## Least Privilege

This is a principle that RBAC uses and spans across different types of access control schemas. This principle states that an employee should have enough permission to complete their tasks, and no more. This is similary to *default-deny* schema, where a user must be explicitly granted permissions to what they need as the needs arise, rather than to everything.

## Desiging a RBAC System

These will look wildly different depending on the situation that you are implementing in, but in general you can follow these steps:

1. Create a list of all the types of users, and types of use-cases for the system. (Don't forget an admin group).
2. Add permissions as needed to each of the groups. Keep in mind any way that a permission could be exploited, trying to protect it as best you can while still allowing the use of the feature.
3. Maintain the system. As needs arise, add permissions to groups or create new groups for new use-cases that arise.

