# Authentication and Authorization in Postgres

## Host-Based Authentication

To configure host-based authentication in Postgres you will edit a file called `pg_hba.conf` to adjust configurations.

Each entry in the file will follow a similar syntax with lines beginning with `#` ignored.

```plaintext
connection_type db user address [auth_options]
```

Here’s a fleshed out example:

```plaintext
hostssl db_example +g_example samenet scram-sha-256
```

Some notes about each of these:

- `connection_type` will also accept `host` to support connections not over https
- the `db` can take the keyword `all` to provide access to all databased
- the `user` section is providing access to all users in the `g_example` group with the `+` rather than adding them to the group. You can also use `all` here to grant access to all users.
- In the `address` , `samenet` is a keyword that specifies only connections from the same subnet, but `all` can also be used here
- The optional `auth_options` field is an encryption type. But, `reject` can also be put at the bottom of this file.

To reject any non-explicity stated permissions, at the bottom of the file, put:

```plaintext
host all all all reject
```

## User and Role Management

In Postgres, (and RBAC) in general, an organized way to implement role management is to use three types of roles:

- Permissions - to determine task-based privelages
- Groups - to collect groups of permissions that will represent a group of users
- Users - to represent employees and will be assigned permissions by joining groups

When creating these, a useful schema to follow is using a preceeding `p` `g` or `u` to keep the type of role clear:

```plaintext
p_customers_read
g_hr
u_owner
```

The following commands will be useful:

```sql
-- Create a new role
CREATE ROLE role_name;

-- Create a role that is a user (not a group or permission)
CREATE ROLE user_name WITH LOGIN;

-- Grant permissions to a role
GRANT PERMISSION ON table TO role;

-- Add a role to another role
GRANT role TO other_role;
```

To create a *default deny* rule, we can remove the permissions for PUBLIC:

```sql
REVOKE PERMISSION ON table FROM PUBLIC;
```

## Server Configuration

We can protect our database server from attackers who are trying to authenticate themselves by adjusting the server configurations in a file called `postgresql.conf`

In particular we can adjust the `listen_addresses` to ensure that we are only allowing connections to the database from IP addresses that we trust. A value of `*` will connect to all, but this is bad practice.

The `port` parameter can be set to specify which port the server will listen on. 49152-65535 are not reserved by any software so you won't typically run into port conflicts here.

The `ssl` parameter will specify whether or not we support secure/tls connections. You would also need to provide a certificate and key to the postgres server.

Here’s a sample of the completed file:

```plaintext
# some_other_configuration = some_values
listen_addresses = 'localhost, 104.20.25.250'
port = 54831
ssl = on
```

## Other Security Configurations to Look Into

- `pg_crypto` for stronger encryption and hashing
- `pgAudit` for enhanced logging and audit capabilities

