# Managing Environment Variables, API Keys and Files in Node.js

## Environment Variables

Environment variables behave just like any other variable in that they are values accessed by a string of texxt, however these variables are stored outside of the program by the operating system or the production environment. These variables are global.

### Environment Variables vs. Config Variables

Another way to accomplish something similar to environment variables is to store your variables in a config.json file. This lesson does not cover that however.

While using environment variables, they will be stored as key-value pairs in a `.env` file.

```plaintext
DB_HOST=localhost
DB_USER=u_api_connection
DB_PASSWORD=j5j2iI-fj2k9d-feadtig
API_KEY=jfji2oklplqkpjr932FE45VuhHwkdj
```

## Create an Environment Variable

First, initialize your environment valiables in a file called `.env` note that the dot at the beginning of the file makes it a "hidden" file. Use the command `touch .env` .

By convention, all of the letters in a variable key should be capitalized with a `_` used to separate them.

## Import Environment Variables Using Dotenv

The npm package, `dotenv` will load our environment variables from our `.env` file into `process.env` where we can access them. We will have to install the package using `npm install dotenv` , and import the package into our project. Then we can run the `.config()` method.

```javascript
// ES6
import dotenv from "dotenv";
dotenv.config();

// Plain Javascript
const dotenv = require("dotenv");
dotenv.config();

// One line
require("dotenv").config();
```

Once this is done, we can access our environment variables through object notation: `process.env.DB_HOST` or `process.env.API_KEY`

## Use Case: Database Credentials

Database credentials should not be hard coded into a program, if they were, someone would only need look at the source code to access your database.

To connect to a database, you will typically need to use (and hide) the following sensitive information:

- Host IP address
- Port
- Database username
- Database password

## Use Case: API Keys

API keys are used to authenticate users on an API. If you hard code your API key into a paid API, and share your program with other developers, all of the devs will be using YOUR account. You will be paying for every hit.

API keys should also be secured, leaking one is like losing a very specific credit card that only pays for one product.

## .gitignore

It is important not to upload our `.env` file to a public repository, since that would defeat the purpose of using environment variables. So with another plaintext file called `.gitignore` we will tell Git to ignore the files listed:

```plaintext
# Our environment variables
.env

# Windows OS file
thumbs.db

# Mac OS metafile
.DS_Store
```

## Environment Variables and Project Collaboration

When sharing a project that uses environment variables, it is best practice to include an `example.env` that has all of the variables that a project will need to run, but it doesn't include any values.

These keys should be well commented and grouped logically so that another programmer can simply input their own credentials, rename the file to `.env`, and run the project.

It is also good practice to include in the `README.md` how to obtain your own credentials, and instructions for the example file.

## Dotenv Documentation

[##motdotla / ##dotenv](https://github.com/motdotla/dotenv#readme)

