# Hash Maps

> ## Big Picture
>
> **Hash map**: A key-value store that uses an array and a hashing function to save and retrieve values.
>
> **Key**: The identifier given to a value for later retrieval.
>
> **Hash function**: A function that takes some input and returns a number.
>
> **Compression function**: A function that transforms its inputs into some smaller range of possible outputs.
>
> **Recipe for saving to a hash table**:
>
> - Take the key and plug it into the hash function, getting the hash code.
> - Modulo that hash code by the length of the underlying array, getting an array index.
> - Check if the array at that index is empty, if so, save the value (and the key) there.
> - If the array is full at that index continue to the next possible position depending on your collision strategy.
>
> **Recipe for retrieving from a hash table**:
>
> - Take the key and plug it into the hash function, getting the hash code.
> - Modulo that hash code by the length of the underlying array, getting an array index.
> - Check if the array at that index has contents, if so, check the key saved there.
> - If the key matches the one you're looking for, return the value.
> - If the keys don't match, continue to the next position depending on your collision strategy.

Hash maps are one of the most efficient data structures for data retrieval. It is a non-linear data type and it works by maping keys to their related values. The key that is associated with the value allows for faster retrieval of the value later on.

## Tables

When using data structures, we are trying to represent data is a way that is meaningful and that is relevant to the way that the data will be used. Lists are good for data that needs to be access sequentially or represented that way.

One of the other ways that we represent data is in a table. In tabluar data (data in a table), the data that is all in one row are related. It allows us to quickly make associatations between different properties of data, and compare different source’s properties.

In a row of a table, a relationship is *mapped* over the columns. Think of mapping as the relationship of one thing to another. Like how in an address book, each address maps to an owner of the address. In government, each congressperson maps to a county that they represent. A list of dogs at a kennel may map to their breed.

## Maps

A map is similar to a table, but it can only really have two columns. So if we had a sample table of states to their state flower, we would call the input, states, our *key*, and the state flower, the *value*.

In a map, every key can only have one value. A key must be uniquely identifiablein the table, so it cannot have multiple values. It doesn’t matter if the values are listed many times or assigned to many keys, but this does not work both ways.

## Hash Map Methodology

Computers are good at storing values, not necessicarily relationships, so we have to trick it into storing data. When using a hash map, we don’t really care about the sequence of the data, so that means that we can use just about any data structure.

To use a hash map, we will store the values of our keys in an array, but we will store them in that array at the index that is assigned to our key. So what if we said that we wanted to store the number of seashells on beaches, and we wanted to store the number 7000 for “Myrtle Beach”. Our key is “Myrtle Beach”, we will put that into a *hashing function* that will return an array index. Then we store the value at that index!

The basis is that we will hash our key into an array index, and then store the value at that array index. This means that we don’t have to iterate and match, we can go directly to the value after we complete the hash!

## Hash Functions

A hashing function takes a string or some other type of data as an input, and in this case will return an array index as an output. We will also need to give it the size of our array, so that it doesn’t provide us an index that it outside of our slots.

The general workings of a hashing function are that the function first computes a value using a scoring metric, which creates the *hash*. Then the hash map implementation takes the hash value modulo the size of the array, then we will get a value that van be used as an index in the array we use.

All hash functions reduce the size of potential outputs, they are destructive and are known as *compression functions.* Hashing is irreversible.

## How to Write a Hash Function

Hashing functions in these implementations are intentionally simple, because the point is not security, it is to make a computationally simple program that can access data quickly.

If hashing numbers, often the number will just be checked to see if it fits into the size of the array that is being used. Strings often take advantage of the fact that letters are represented numerically in a computer, so they will just perform a bitwise shift of the data.

## Basic Hash Maps

1. Gather a set of associated data
2. Create an array of fixed size.
3. Create a simple hash function that translates keys into indexes.
   - For example, add the number of lowercase a's and lowercase e's
   - Modulo this hash by the length of the array
   - The resulting index is called a *hash bucket*

## Collisions

It is very likely that the same hash will be generated from two different keys, this is referred to as a *hash collission*. There are two ways of dealing with this:

### Separate Chaining

- Instead of using an array of values, the map is an array of linked lists.

This means that when two hashes collide, the values will be stored in the same index in a list. So any time a value is added, the index is checked to see if it’s empty, and if it is a new linked list is created. If there is already a list there, the new hash is appended.

The hashing function here must be good at giving unique indicies, because, if the linked lists get too long, the performance will suffer.

To make sure that we don’t lose track of which values match with which keys, instead of only storing the value, we will store the key with it’s value. This way there is a unique and searchable piece of data within the list. Once we access the appropriate index, we can then search out a match for a key by iterating through the list and returning the matching key.

### Open Addressing: Linear Probing

Another way to deal with collissions is to continue searching for available indecies if the index is occupied. There are different methods do this, one is called *probing*. When probing, a function will continue searching along the array at a fixed sequence until an empty index is found. For example, if 6 is occupied and the probing sequence is 2, the function would then check 8, and 10 and so on (looping around the end of the array).

We could also create a *quadratic probing* system, where we add increasingly large numbers to the code. (After one collission, we add 1, after two we add 4, after the third we add 9.) This will avoid what is called *clustering*, or the continued displacement of orginal hash values by displaced hashes.

