# Manipulation

## Introduction to SQL

- Uses declarative statements to access and manipulate data

## Relational Database

- Organizes information into one or more tables
- A tables is a collection of data in rows and columns, they are also sometimes referred to as "relations"
- A row is a single record within a table
- Each row contains columns that represent data points
- Each piece of data has a data type:
   - `INTEGER`
   - `TEXT`
   - `DATE`
   - `REAL`

## Statements

- A *statement* is text that a database recognizes as a command. Here's an example:

```sql
CREATE TABLE table_name (
  column_1 data_type,
  column_2 data_type,
  column_3 data_type
);
```

1. `CREATE TABLE` is a *clause*. A clause performs a task. Any clause should be written in capital letters by convention. AKA commands
2. `table_name` is the name of the table that the command is for
3. Between parentheses - a *parameter*, or a list of columns, data types, or values that are passed to the clause as an argument

You can write these on one or on many lines, but it must end with a `;` semi-colon

## Create

To create a table, use `CREATE` . You must specify columns by name and data type. So to fill in the example from above.

```sql
CREATE TABLE celebs (
  id INTEGER, 
  name TEXT,
  age INTEGER
);
```

## Insert

To add a row to a table, use `INSERT` . We will use the `INSERT INTO` clause to specify the table and then we pass the parameters to it. To insert data into the above table, we would run

```sql
INSERT INTO celebs (id, name, age)
VALUES (1, 'Justin Bieber', 29)
```

- Notice the parameter `(id, name, age)` , this specifies which columns we are inserting into
- `VALUES` clause indicates that we are about to give the data which takes a parameter of the actual data

## Select

To fetch data from a database, use a `SELECT` statement. If we wanted the names in the celebs table

```sql
SELECT name FROM celebs;
```

SELECT <name of column> FROM <name of table>

You can also use the `*` to get data from all of the columns.

The `SELECT` statement returns a new table called the *result set*.

## Alter

To add a new column to a table, use `ALTER TABLE` . Let's add `twitter_handle` to the columns in the celebs table.

```sql
ALTER TABLE celebs
ADD COLUMN twitter_handle TEXT;
```

Since there's already data in our table, any row that has this column added will have `NULL` as its value (∅). It represents missing or unknown data

## Update

To edit rows in a table, use `UPDATE` and specify the column to change and an indication of the row to update.

```sql
UPDATE celebs
SET twitter_handle = '@taylorswift13'
WHERE id = 4;
```

- Define the table with the `UPDATE` clause, then define the data and column with the `SET` clause and then define which row(s) with the `WHERE` clause.

## Delete

To delete one or more rows from a table, use `DELETE FROM` , and specify the table and row

```sql
DELETE FROM celebs
WHERE twitter_handle IS NULL;
```

- `IS NULL` is a condition that returns true when the value is NULL and false otherwise

## Constraints

To define how a column can be used, add information after the data type when defining a column. ( i.e. make a unique value, set default value, reject values )

```sql
CREATE TABLE celebs (
  id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
  name TEXT UNIQUE,
  date_of_birth TEXT NOT NULL,
  date_of_birth TEXT DEFAULT 'Not Applicable'
);
```

- `PRIMARY KEY` can be used to uniquely identify the row, is automatically constrained to be unique
- `UNIQUE` must have a different value for each row.
- `NOT NULL` must have a value
- `DEFAULT` allows specification of an assumed value for an inserted row

