# Flexbox

### What is Flexbox?

- Flexible Box Layout
   - Flex containers: elements on the page that contain flex items
   - flex items: all direct child element of flex containers
- `display: flex`
- `display: inline-flex`

### display: flex

- Any element can become a flex container. This means that they will respond to changes in screen size.

### inline-flex

- The difference between flex and inline-flex is that with `display: flex` is that the *flex items* will be flexed but the container is still block-level, in `display: inline-flex` the flex items are flexed but the block is now inline

### justify-content

- `justify-content:`
   - `flex-start` all items will be positioned in order starting from the left of the container, with no extra space between them or before them
   - `flex-end` all items will be in order, the last item will start on the right side of the parent container with no space between them.
   - `center` - all items will be positioned in order, in the center of the parent with no extra space before, between, or after them
   - `space-around` - items will be positioned with equal space before and after each item, resulting in double the space between elements
   - `space-between` - positioned with equal space between them, but no exptra space before the first or after the last
   - “no extra space” - Marginss and borders will be respected, but no more space than specified will be added. The size of the flex items are not changed by this property.

### align-items

- For spacing flex items vertically
- `align-items:`
   - `flex-start` - top of the parent container
   - `flex-end` - bottom of the parent container
   - `center` - halfway between the top and the bottom from the center of the item.
   - `baseline` the bottom will all be aligned to eachother
   - `stretch` - stretch from top to bottom of the container (this is the default, elements with a specified height will not stretch and elements with a min height or no height will)

### flex-grow

- Flex items don’t grow be default, but they will shink by default. To have them grow to the size of the container, using `flex-grow`
- You can also use it to decide, which items grow in proportion to one another.
- `flex-grow` is declared on the items themselves and not the containers
- This has a default value of 0

### flex-shrink

- This is a lot like `flex-grow` but like, the other way
- The default value of `flex-shrink` is 1 so, when its declared it will shrink.
- For both of these, min and max eidths will care more

### flex-basis

- This is a way to specify the widths of a flex item
- `flex-basis` is used to give a width for before the item stretches or shrinks

### flex

- `flex` lets you declare grow, shrink and basis all in one line

```css
.big {
  flex-grow: 2;
  flex-shrink: 1;
  flex-basis: 150px;
}

/* OR */

.big {
  flex: 2 1 150px;
}
```

- This can also accept two values, either:
   - flex-grow and flex-shrink, OR
   - flex-grow and flex-basis

### flex-wrap

- Instead of having content change sizes, we can have it change lines.
- `flex-wrap`
   - `wrap` - children of the container that don't fit in the row will move to the next line.
   - `wrap-reverse` - same as above but the order of the rows will be reversed
   - `nowrap` - keeps items from wrapping, it is the default value

### align-content

- different from `align-items` which aligns items in a single row, if there are multiple rows of content use
- `align-content`
   - `flex-start`
   - `flex-end`
   - `center`
   - `space-between`
   - `space-around`
   - `stretch` - if a minimum height or no height is specified, the rows of elements will stretch to fill the parent container from top to bottom
- This handles vertical spacing of multiple rows.

### flex-direction

- Flex containers have two axes: the *main axes* (horizontal by default) and *cross axis* (vertical).
- Main Axis properties
   - `justify-content`
   - `flex-wrap`
   - `flex-grow`
   - `flex-shrink`
- Cross Axis properties
   - `align-items`
   - `align-content`
- We can switch the main and cross axis with `flex-direction: column;`
- This will display horizontal content vertically, and then let you use the main axis properties as if you were on your side
- `flex-direction`
   - `row` (default)
   - `row-reverse`
   - `column`
   - `column-reverse`
- These are declared on flex containers

### flex-flow

- `flex-flow` combines the wrap and direction properties

```css
.container {
  display: flex;
  flex-wrap: wrap;
  flex-direction: column;
}
/* OR */
.contianer {
  display: flex;
  flex-flow: column wrap;
}
```

### Nested Flexboxes

