# Grid Essentials

### Introduction to Grids

- The *grid* can be used to layout entire web pages.
- Flexbox is better for one-dimensional layots, grid is best for 2d

### Creating a Grid

- To create a grid, you need a *grid container*  and *grid items*

```html
<div class="grid-container">
  <div class="grid-item"></div>
  <div class="grid-item"></div>
</div>
```

- To make an object a grid container, we will assign it either:
   - `display: grid;` or
   - `display: inline-grid;`

### Creating Columns

- A default grid only has one column
- If you add items to a default grid, they will just be given a new row
- `grid-template-columns` is a property that will let us define the columns of our grid
   - This property sets the number of columns in the grid and then sets the width of each column.

```css
.grid {
  display: grid;
  width: 500px;
  grid-template-columns: 100px 200px;
}
```

   - This will create **two columns**, the first is 100px and the second is 200px
   - You can also use percentages to define the size of the columns.
   - The units can also be mixed and matched.

### Creating Rows

- `grid-template-rows` - this is just like the columns one
- Rows be default are sized to fit evently inside the grid.

### Grid Template

- You can replace the above by placing the row values first, then a slash followed by the column values.
- `grid-template: 200px 300px / 20% 10% 70%;`

### Fraction

- You can use the relative sizing unit `fr` to define the size of columns and rows as a fraction of the gird's length and width.
- This was made specifically for CSS Grid, and it makes it easier to keep things from overflowing.
- `grid-template: 2fr 1fr 1fr / 1fr 3fr 1fr;`
- If you mix `fr` with other units, it will take a fraction of the remaining available space.

### Repeat

You can give `grid-template` or it's counterparts a value that is a function, to save time.

- `grid-template-columns: repeat(3 100px);` This will create 3 columns that are 100px wide
- `repeat()` can also take multiple values for the second parameter. This will alternate between them.

### minmax

- If we want to let our grid grow or shrink with the browser, this function will let us set limits for how big and small the columns and rows get.
```css
.grid {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: 100px minmax(100px, 500px) 100px;
}
```

- This code wil set the first and third columns at 100px regardless, but the second column will change with the window size.

### Grid Gap

- This adds space between the items in our grid. They will not add space before the first or after the last object.
- `row-gap`
- `column-gap`
- They both accept length units.
- The length that is taken from the grid in the gaps will be subtrated from the total, which is good to keep in mind if you’re using the `fr` units
- `gap` - set them at the same time i.e. `gap: 20px 10px;`
   - DEPRECATED: the following properties to perform this function are no longer in use:
      - `grid-row-gap`
      - `grid-column-gap`
      - `grid-gap`

### Grid Items

- Items can take up more than one grid "cell". The rest of the properties will apply to the items themselves.

### Multiple Row Items

- `grid-row-start`
- `grid-row-end`
- These will make items take up more than one row:

```css
.item {
  grid-row-start: 1;
  grid-row-end: 3;
}
```

- The values accepted by this are *grid lines*, meaning that this will fill grid rows 1 and 2, and stop at the third grid line.
- There is n+1 grid lines, where n is the number of rows or columns that the grid has.
- Start *can* be higher than end, and they can both take negative values - but we're not covering that.

### Grid Row

- Combine start and end: `grid-row: 4 / 6;`

### Grid Column

- `grid-column-start`
- `grid-column-end`
- `grid-column`
- All the same
- In both properties, we can use the keyword `span` to start or end a column or row relative to its other end.
   - i.e. `grid-column: 4 / span 2;` == `grid-column: 4 / 6`
   - You can also use this in the -start and -end properties
   - Easier to use so that you’re not off by 1. If you know the start and how long you want it, use span

### Grid Area

- We can refactor`grid-row`  and `grid-column` as `grid-area` :
```css
.item {
  grid-area: 2 / 3 / 4 / span 5;
}
```

   1. `grid-row-start`
   2. `grid-column-start`
   3. `grid-row-end`
   4. `grid-column-end`

