# Advanced CSS Grid

### Grid Template Areas

- `grid-template-areas` allows you to name sections of the webpage to use as values for :
   - `grid-row-start`
   - `grid-row-end`
   - `grid-column-start`
   - `grid-column-end`
   - `grid-area`
- This is a property that we declare on grid containers
- Here’s an example

```css
.container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-areas: "header header"
                       "nav nav"
                       "info services"
                       "footer footer";
  grid-template-rows: repeat(4, 1fr);
  grid-template-columns: repeat (2, 1fr);
}
```

This code first names “cells” in a grid, a 2 by 4 grid. Then the grid is defined by the -template- properites. You can assign items to those grid slots like this:

```css
header {
  grid-area: header;
  /*Will be on the top row across two columns.*/
}

nav {
  grid-ara: nav;
  /*Will be on the second row across two columns*/
}

.info {
  grid-area: info;
  /*Third row, first column*/
}

.services {
  grid-area: services;
  /*Third row, second column*/
}
```

### Overlapping Elements

- By using `grid-area` you can set elements to overlap eachother, just make sure to use the `z-index` property to make sure that they overlap in the order that you want.

### Justify Items

- `justify-items` is a property that positions grid items along the inline, or row, axis. This means that it positions items from left to right across the web page. This is declared on grid containers. Acceptable values are
   - `start` - left side
   - `end` - right side
   - `center`
   - `stretch` - to fill area
   - There are more, but you can search them on MDN

### Justify Content

- `justify-content` will position the entire grid along the row axis - this is declared on grid containers
   - `start`
   - `end`
   - `center`
   - `stretch`
   - `space-around`
   - `space-between`
   - `space-evenly`

```css
main {
  display: grid;
  width: 1000px;
  grid-template-columns: 300px 300px;
  grid-template-areas: "left right"; 
  justify-content: center;
}
```

- If the total container is 1000px and we have only declared two columns 300px and 300px with no gap declarations, then there will be 600px of unused space. `justify-content` will tell the browser what to do with the unused space. In this example, it will place the two columns in the center, with no space on either side.

### Align Items

- `align-items` is the same as `justify-items` but it works along the block, or column axis. Meaning it positions items top to bottom.
   - Positioning within the row

### Align Content

- `align-content` is the same as `justify-content` but on the block, or column axis. Meaning up and down.

### Justify Self and Align Self

- `justify-self` and `align-self` specify how individual elements should positions themsleves with respect to the row axis or column axis respectively. These will both override the `-items` properties. And they are declared on grid items
- `stretch` is the default value
- This is a great way to move individual elements that share a class with other items

### Implicit vs. Explicit Grid

- We have been using an *explicit grid* where we know exactly how much grid there will be. This is good for static webpages.
- Sometimes we need to create pages without knowing the exact amount of content - social media, online shopping, etc.
- The **implicit grid** is an algorithm built into the specifcation for CSS Grid that determines default behavior for element placement when there are more than fit into the grid specified by CSS.
- Default behavior:
   - Items full up rows, adding new rows as necessary
   - New grid rows are only as tall as the content needs.

### Grid Auto Rows and Grid Auto Columns

- To change the default behavior of the *implicit grid* we can use `grid-auto-rows` and `grid-auto-columns`
- They take `px` `%` `fr` `repeat()`

An example:

```html
<body>
  <div>Part 1</div>   
  <div>Part 2</div>
  <div>Part 3</div>
  <div>Part 4</div>
  <div>Part 5</div>
</body>
```

```css
body {
  display: grid;
  grid: repeat(2, 100px) / repeat(2, 150px); 
  grid-auto-rows: 50px;
}
```

- Even though the grid property only specifies 2 rows and 2 columns, we can still add more rows if there's content, the remaining rows will just be 50px

### Grid Auto Flow

- `grid-auto-flow` accepts:
   - `row` - fils added content in rows first left to right
   - `column` fills added content in columns first top to bottom
   - `dense` - fills added content in holes earlier in the grid layout
   - Row or column can be paired with dense
   - `grid-auto-flow: row dense;`

