# Sizing Elements

### Relative Measurements

- **Responsive design** ensures that our website will still look good on various screen sizes
   - Responsive design is the ability of a website to resize and reorganize its content based on the size of other content and the size of the screen it is being viewed on.
- By using relative measurements rather than hard coded measurements, we can keep the proportions of the site intact.

### Em

- `em` as a unit used to be the width of the capital letter M in the typface and size you were using, but no longer. now it *represents the font-size of the current element or the default base font-size if none is given.*

```css
.heading {
  font-size: 2em;
}
```

- If the deafault font size was 16px, then this would be 32px.

### Rem

- `rem` stands for *root element* works similar to em, but instead of looking to the parent element for a font, it looks back to the root element, `<html>`
- The `<html>` default font size is 16px. You can change this with a type declaration.
- If you want to size elements consistently accross a whole website, rem is perfect, If you’re interested in sizing elements in comparison to other elements nearby, it would be better to use em

### Percentages: Height & Width

- Percentages size elements relative to their parent element.
- Because the box model includes padding, borders, and margins, setting an element’s `width` to `100%` may cause content to overflow its parent container. While tempting, `100%` should only be used when content will not have padding, border, or margin.
- The parent must be set for percentages to be effective and predicable.

### Percentages: Padding & Margin

- Though percentages in sizing child elements take into account both the width and height elements, with padding and margin, they *only consider element width.*
- **Note:** When using relative sizing, ems and rems should be used to size text and dimensions on the page related to text size (i.e. padding around text). This creates a consistent layout based on text size. Otherwise, percentages should be used.

### Width: Minimum & Maximum

- `min-width`
- `max-width`
- These keep elements from losing their integrity when extreme window changes happen.

### Height: Minimum & Maximum

- Same as above for height

### Scaling Images and Videos

- For images and videos, width and height should be set so that it is viewed correctly.
- `height:auto;` height will automatically scale to its width
- This is worth memorizing: It is a very common design pattern used to scale images and videos properly

```css
.container {
  width: 50%;
  height: 200px;
  overflow: hidden;
}

.container img {
  max-width: 100%;
  height: auto;
  display: block;
}
```

you can swap to max-height: 1005 and width: auto to mirror the effect of the smushed image

Why are we using max-width? A helpful explaination

> I feel that responses here somehow created more confusion.

> Here is how it works:

> In this case u have 3 options.

1. > Go with width: 100% - that will strecth or shrink the image to fill the container, no matter what width container has.
2. > Go with max-width: 100% (like in this case) - this will make the image fill the container UP TO the image maximum size, if the container gets bigger than the image size, the image will not stretch any further. for example, lets say the image size is 640x400. If the container width is 320px the image will adjust to that… but if the container width is larger then 640px, the picture will not stretch any further… it will go UP TO 100% of the image size… that means 640px:
3. > Go with min-width: If we take the example above and we have a picture that is 640x400, min-width: 100% will make the images AT LEAST 640px wide, so if your container is less than that, the image won’t scale down, it will overflow the container.

### Scaling Background Images

```css
body {
  background-image: url('#');
  background-repeat: no-repeat;
  background-position: center;
  background-size: cover;
}
```

