# Overview of the Internet

### Hello, Internet!

- How is data sent from one computer to another?
- What is the relationship between a browser and a server?
- How is code turned into the experience that users see if their browsers?
- How has the web and web development changed from its invention to today?

> Interesting website: internetlivestats.com

### The Ever-Expanding Network

- The internet started in 1969 with ARPANET, a research network funded by the Dept of Defense to allow universities to communicate with one another.
- **TCP/IP** - *transmission control protocol, internet protocol* - data standards that were created so that early networks could communicate with eachother

### The World Wide Web

- The world-wide-web and the Internet are two different things, though they are commmonly referred to interchangably. The internet came first, and it was basically only sending messages from one computer to another. A man named **Tim Berners-Lee** in 1989 (twenty years after the creation of ARPANET) created the **world wide web.**
- **World wide web** - *a collection of interlinked websites and other web resources*
- The intoduction of web browsers allowed people to interact with the world wide web in a user-friendly way.

### Browsers and Servers

- Interactions on the internet happen between a **client** and a **server**.
- **Client** - a user device or program that makes requests for data
- **Server** - a device or program in a network that waits for requests and sends back data

> #### What is a server?

[](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oJ8NzLGMrSA&embeds_referring_euri=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.codecademy.com%2F&embeds_referring_origin=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.codecademy.com&feature=emb_imp_woyt)

- > A web browser, given an address, will send a request to a server for files that make up the site. The server sends it back. The browser then interprets the data that it received.
- > A server listens for requests on a network.
   - > They are focused on data storage and retrieval, so they are not like personal computers.
- > HTTP is the Internet Protocal that allows data transfer from a server to a client.
   - > Hypertext Transfer Protocol
   - > There are different requests
      - > GET, POST, PUT, DELETE

### 404 Status Code

- Any time that a server sends a response to a client it sends a **status code** along with the data. This helps the web browser interpret the data.
- > 200 - OK
- > 301 - Moved Permenantly
- > 404 - Not Found
- > 500 - Internal Server Error

### How Do Browsers Work?

- HTTP Request
- HTML file
   - Accompanied by CSS and other data
   - JS is also sent back this way
- Most websites will require multiple requests that all happen in **parallel**, meaning that they do not wait for one another to complete before requesting and displaying what is responded.

### Web 2.0

- In "Web 1.0", interations were mostly text, links, and images and they didn't move. There was not a lot of interactivity. This is a **static** webpage.
- Web 2.0 is the name for a clump of advances to how web pages were interacted with that allowed new features on sites. Notably, the ability to interact with a page without it having to reload.
   - *jQuery* - JavaScript framework that fetches data while the website is running
   - *web frameworks* - these connected to databases and make it easier to create, store and display user content

### Current Internet Trends

- Mobile devices now account for more than half of all internet traffic.

#### Responsive Web Design

- Updates to CSS that allow websites to be presented well regardless of the size of device that is displaying the site.

#### Mobile Applications and Devices

- Applications on devices are responsible for most of the traffic. Not necessarily the phone's browser.
- Applications are not part of the world wide web.

