# Languages for Web Development

### HTML Markup

“ML” - Markup language

- A markup language annotates content on a document.
- HTML uses tags to do this.

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head>
    <title>HTML Tutorial</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <h1>Hello World</h1>
    <p>My first webpage</p>
  </body>
</html>
```

#### Is HTML considered a programming language?

[](https://discuss.codecademy.com/t/is-html-considered-a-programming-language/368193?_gl=1*1dihih5*_ga*NDA1MzM5NDcwNS4xNzA0MjkwNjM5*_ga_3LRZM6TM9L*MTcwNDgyODc3MC40LjEuMTcwNDgyOTEyNC41Ny4wLjA.)

- Most programmers would say no because it does not provide functionality.
- HTML is a **markup language** which is a different specific type of language.

### Hypertext and the World Wide Web

“HT” - **h**yper**t**ext

- **hypertext** - text that is linked to other text
- The core of the internet is a bunch of linked documents, this is hypertext

### Addiing Hyperlinks

- **attribute** - provides additional information about an HTML element
```html
name="value"
i.e. width="500"
```

- **href** - is an attribute for an anchor <a> tag - hyperlink reference
- **relative paths** - you can abbreviate an href link if you are going to another page on the same website. you can just include what is after the “.com"

### What is CSS?

- **separation of concerns** - The reason that styling is not done "in-line" (though it can be), is because of this CS principle. By separating codebases by functionality, it is much easier to maintain. Each section of code should have a clear problem that it's trying to solve.

### Applying CSS

- **selectors** - specify the HTML elements that the style should be applied to
- **visual rules** - specify how the content is to be displayed
- To link the HTML document to the CSS file we wil use an HTML **link tag**.
- The link tag tells the browser what CSS to apply to an HTML document.

#### Example of a link tag

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css">
```

### What is JavaScript?

- JavaScript is utilized by basically any website that does more than provide static information
   - popup ads
   - animated graphics
   - interactive video and aduio
- JavaScript is able to respond to *browser events. These happen in real time*.
   - user click
   - user keystroke
   - video file finishes loading
   - user resizes window
   - user hovers over text
- **functions** - reusable blocks of code designed to perform a specific task

### JavaScript Functions

- **functions** - a reusable bit of code, so we can reuse the same code over and over
- **events** - the name for user inputs or something that triggers a response by JavaScript
- **<script>** the tag that alrts the browser that it’s about to have to read JavaScript
- HTML attributes can set events, where the **name** of the attribute is the events and the **value** of the attribute is the JavaScript function that we want to execute.

### What is SQL?

- SQL stands for **s**tructured **q**ueary **l**anguage.
- SQL stores information in tables, which are just rows and colums of information.
- **query** - to access information in SQL you would perform one a query

#### Example of a Query

```sql
SELECT * FROM page_views;
--This query selects the "page_views" table from the database.
```

- SQL allows for the **saving, modifying and accessing** of data.
- **Data engineering** - a sepcialized subset of software engineers who ensure that the aplications they are working with accurately and efficiently record all of the required data.

#### What else does SQL do?

[](https://discuss.codecademy.com/t/what-are-some-other-useful-things-that-sql-lets-us-do/369813?_gl=1*zbrnb*_ga*NDA1MzM5NDcwNS4xNzA0MjkwNjM5*_ga_3LRZM6TM9L*MTcwNDgzMTUwNC41LjEuMTcwNDgzMzY3MS42MC4wLjA.)

- SQL can select specific rows based on conditions
- SQL can *aggregate* data, meaning that it can look at the whole.
- SQL can combine tables and perform functions between them.

### Review

- **HTML** - structures website content
- **CSS** - applies styling to websites
- **JavaScript** - adds interavtivity to websites
- **SQL** - allows your web application to store and retrieve data

