# Classes

### Introduction to Classes

- JavaScript is *object-oriented*
- Classes are a tool that devs use to quickly produce similar objects.

### Constructor

- The `constructor()` method will be invoked by JavaScript in the creation of an instance of a class.

```javascript
class Dog {
  constructor(name) {
    this.name = name;
    this.behavior = 0;
  }
}
```

- `Dog` is the name of the class. Convention is that the first letter is capitalized and we use PascalCase
- JS invokes the `constructor()` class each time we create a new instance of the `Dog` class
   - It accepts `name` as an argument
- Inside the `constructor()` method, `this` refers to the instance of the class.
   - This allows us to set the initialization

### Instance

- An *instance* is an object that contains the property names and methods of a class, but has unique property values.

```javascript
const halley = new Dog('Halley');
// A new instance of Dog is created with its name set to 'Halley'
```

- The variable `halley` holds the instance of Dog
- The `new` keyword generates a new instance of the `Dog` class by calling the `constructor()` and returning the new instance

### Methods

- The syntax is the same as for methods with objects, however **you cannot include commas between methods in a class.**

```javascript
class Dog {
  constructor(name) {
    this._name = name;
    this._behavior = 0;
  }
// NO COMMA
  get name() {
    return this._name;
  }
// NO COMMA
  get behavior() {
    return this._behavior;
  }
// NO COMMA
  incrememtBehavior() {
    this._behavior++;
  }
}
```

- The underscore prepended means that we should not interact with the property directly
- NO Commas

### Method Calls

- This works the same as calling methods on objects ⇒ [We call —use—  a method by appending an instance with](https://docs.craft.do/editor/d/b4ae036d-e2e6-fd10-7e5e-f12ec518b2e1/12D7CF92-1A43-43FB-B9DC-E0DD388A6716/x/A24A281B-3C46-4E67-9352-1F3EC6B647A7)…

### Inheritance

- When multiple classes share properties or methods, they become candidates for inheritance.
- Inheritance allows developers to write less code.
- You can create *parent* classes and *child* classes (or super- and sub-classes)
   - Child classes inherit properties and methods from parent classes

```javascript
class Cat extends Animal {
  constructor(name, usesLitter) {
    super(name);
    this._usesLitter = usesLitter;
  }
}
```

- The `extends` keyword makes the methods of the animal class available inside the class cat
- When `Cat` constructor is called, it accepts two arguments
- The `super` keyword calls the constructor of the parent class, here the `name` parameter will be passed to the Animal constructor
- `_usesLitter` is a property that is unique to the `Cat` class
- Always call `super` on the first line of the constructor - if `this` is used before the `super` keyword, then a reference error will be thrown
- When `extends` is used, all of the parents' methods are available to the child class

### Static Methods

- You can also create methods that are available in the parent class but not in the children.
- These are called *static methods*

```javascript
class Animal {
  constructor(name) {
    this._name = name;
    this._behavior = 0;
  }

  static generateName() {
    const names = ['Angel', 'Spike', 'Buffy', 'Willow', 'Tara'];
    const randomNumber = Math.floor(Math.random()* 5);
    return names[randomNumber];
  }
}
```

- The method `.generateName()` will only be available in the parent class. It cannot be called by the child classes.

```javascript
console.log(Animal.generateName()); // returns a name

const tyson = new Animal('Tyson');
tyson.generateName(); // TypeError
```

