# HTML Document Standards

### Preparing for HTML

- **Document type declaration** - tell a browser what language we are using.
```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
```

- This must be the first line of code in an HTML document, and this will tell the browser to expect **HTML5** since that is the current standard.
- HTML code is always saved in a file with an **.html** extension.
- Other web languages don’t need to be declared because they are called into the html document through <link> elements.

### The <html> Tag

- The declaration won't add any structure.
- The structure is created by an <html> tag.
- Only what is between these tags will be interpreted on the page.

### The Head

- <head> gives the browser information about the page itself - the **metadata**

### Page Titles

- <title>

### Linking to Other Web Pages

- **path** - the name for the value of the href attribute, usually a URL
[](https://discuss.codecademy.com/t/how-can-i-link-to-a-file-on-my-own-computer/341029?_gl=1*1pma21g*_ga*NDA1MzM5NDcwNS4xNzA0MjkwNjM5*_ga_3LRZM6TM9L*MTcwNDkxMTIzNS43LjEuMTcwNDkxMTI3OS4xNi4wLjA.)

### Opening Links in a New Window

- **target** - attribute of the <a> tag that specifies how a link should open

```html
<a href="URL" target=_blank></a>
  <!--This will open in a new window-->
```

### Linking to a Relative Page

- **root directory** - the main folder where all the files for a project are stored

```html
project-folder/
|-- about.html
|-- contact.html
|-- index.html
```

- Storing html files in the same folders allows the browser to know that they are related. This allows for the use of **relative paths**.
- **Relative paths** are filename pathways to *local files* (a file on the same network) versus an **absolute path** which is a full URL.
- A relative path is called through    ./   telling the browser to search for the file in the current folder.

### Linking At Will

- Wrapping any tag in an anchor tag will turn it into a link.

### Linking to Same Page

- Using *id* attributes, we can link to specific parts of the page.
- Use #name to link to the id.

```html
<p id="top">This is the top of the page.</p>
<a href="#top">Go to top</a>
```

- id can help organize content inside <div>s
- <li> elements should *always* be *direct children* of either <ol> or <ul> (or the experimental <menu> tags.
- <li> is a block level element, and <a> is inline. In our syntax we wrap inline elements with block elements.

### Whitespace

- *Whitespace* and *indentation* help programmers to see the relationships between elements.
- Browsers ignore *blank lines* or whitespace, so it is strictly for backend work.
   - Whitespace is any character or series of characters which creates space on a page but does not display a visible mark. (tabs and spaces)
   - Indentation is a type of horizontal whitespace
- Try and put each element on its own line, this shows the relationships better.

### Indentation

- Spaces are inserted using the space and tab bars
- Wold Wide WEb Consortium or W3C sets style standards of HTML.
- Indentation reccommendation is **2 spaces**.

### Comments

```html
<!--This is a comment, it won't display in a browser.-->
```

- Comments add context and allow you to "comment out" code that you would like to bypass in testing without deleting it.
[](https://discuss.codecademy.com/t/how-often-should-i-leave-comments-within-my-code/341036?_gl=1*9669sl*_ga*NDA1MzM5NDcwNS4xNzA0MjkwNjM5*_ga_3LRZM6TM9L*MTcwNDkxMTIzNS43LjEuMTcwNDkxMzgxNS42MC4wLjA.)

### HTML Tags

- Choosing the proper tag to describe the content you are putting on a web page is one key to high-quality web development.
- A full list of tags:
[](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element)

- `<meta charset="utf-8">`
   - Sets the character set to UTF-8, which means that the page can handle all the text that you through at it.
- ::Codecademy is light on discussion of metadata.::
   - **COME BACK**

