# OWASP Top 10

## Introduction

The Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) is a respected security authority that maintains a list, the top ten, of most threatening security vulnerabilities.

## Injection

Injection is the use of inputs to *inject* or insert code that will be run by a compiler. This can cause the compiler to crash or worse, for sensitive data to be leaked. This is often associated with SQL but other languages can be injected just the same, some attackers will even target the operating system that hosts the web server itself.

### Example

If we were creating a SQL query:

```java
query = "SELECT product_name, product_cost FROM product_table WHERE product_name = " + USER_INPUT + "'";
```

and the attacker injected:

```plaintext
soap' UNION SELECT username,password,NULL FROM user_table;-- -
```

then the completed query would display any products that match soap AND the usernames and passwords from the database. The complete query that the complier is sending to the database is:

```java
SELECT product_name, product_cost FROM product_table WHERE product_name = 'soap' UNION SELECT username,password,NULL FROM user_table;-- -';
```

Some other SQL specific examples are:

- Adding `--` to comment the remainder of the query to produce a syntax error.
- Adding a logical `OR` operator with a true expression to force login
- Adding a `; DROP TABLE` to terminate the expression early and create a new malicious command.

### Prevention

Injection attacks are effectively mitigated through input field validation and input sanitation.

## Broken Authentication

Broken authentication is a broad term for the ability of an attacker to impersonate another user. Some examples include, insecure credentials, forgotten test accounts, ability to brute force a login, etc.

### Example

An account with the credentials `admin` `admin` were left in the database after development.

### Prevention

Follow ALL best practices around authentication. Including but not limited to:

- Limiting password attempts
- Ensuring secure username and password combinations
- Secure session verification

Check on the best practices for the technologies that you're using!

## Sensitive Data Exposure

Sensitive data is data that is could be harmful to a person if it fell into the wrong hands. This type of vulnerability can come in many forms and there is no real one way to prevent it, but it should be noted that when sensitive data is leaked, that data lives a long life on the dark web, moving as *fullz*.

The way that any website handles sensitive data should be careful. Check Data Protection laws and regulations for a good starting point, but any additional secuirty measures that are put in place are a good idea.

## XML External Enteties (XXE)

XML External Enteties is a vulnerability that is similar to Injection, in that it gets a target machine to run malicious code. Where Injection supplies that code with an input field, XXE provides the mailicious code through an XML document uploaded typically to a server.

XML is a markup language that has some vulnerabilities, and is not best practice to use.

### Example

A simple line like `<!ENTITY xxe SYSTEM "`[`file:///etc/passwd`](file:///etc/passwd)`" >]>` could potentially add an entry point for access to the password file on the server.

### Prevention

The best way to prevent XXE is just to not use XML.

## Broken Access Control

Broken Access Control is another broad vulnerability that consists of an attacker taking advantage of weak authentication on a website.

### Example

An attacker using URL endpoints to access user data that the attacker is not authorized to see. The URL endpoints don’t have good authorization.

### Prevention

There is not one prevention method. Ensuring all pages and features of a website are properly authenticated is a multifaceted procedure.

## Security Misconfiguration

Security software requires proper configuration to be effective. Whether the default settings are insecure or some setting were forgotten, misconfigurations of security software allow attackers to run a muck.

### Examples

- Forgetting to protect cloud storage
- Leaving unnecesary features or permissions available on a server
- Disabling automatic updates
- Displaying overly informative error messages
- Weak rules for intrusion detection software (IDS) or firewall

### Prevention

There is no “set and forget” for security software. There should be a regular review of security configuraitons.

## Cross-Site Scripting (XSS)

XSS is where an attacker targets the browser-side of a website and get the site to run malicious Javascript. Website that take and store user input and then display that input to others on the internet are vulnerable to this.

### Prevention

Typical characters like `<` `>` `=` `”` should be escaped in user inputs, and more.

## Insecure Deserialization

Serialization is the process of turning an object into formatted data, and deserialization is the process of turning it back. The formatted data is called a byte stream. An attacker who can gain access to this byte stream can modify the stream so that when the stream is deserialized after a transfer, the new object contains malicious data or code that will execute.

### Prevention

The best way to prevent this kind of attack is to not deserialize external data.

## Using Components with Known Vulnerabilities

Since software and package vulnerabilities are common, it’s important to know the vulnerabilities that are possible though the dependencies that you have installed in your projects. Attackers can take advantage of known vulnerabilities more easily because they don’t need to do as much discovery work. In fact there are many resources and tools that detail and discover known vulnerabilities, some that will even suggest exploit kits.

[CVE -CVE](https://cve.mitre.org/)

### Prevention

Keep your software packages up to date, and when is not supported or vulnerabilities are not patched, find actively supported replacements.

## Insufficent Logging and Monitoring

Logging and monitoring should be an assistance to early detection. Events like a significant amount of failed login attempts in a minute should be logged in a way that is easy to read and triggers alerts when certain patterns of events occur. Good logging and monitoring can be the difference between a major breach and stopping the attacker before they get to anything vital.

