# What are Databse Keys?

## Introduction

A database key is a column or group of columns in a table that *uniquely identifies* a row in a table.

Keys help us to avoid duplicity in data and to enforce data integrity.

There are mulitple types of keys:

- **Primary**
- **Foreign**
- Super
- Candidate
- **Composite**
- Secondary

## Primary Key

A column, or multiple columns in a table that uniquely identifies each row in the table. This column must be unique and not null.

To create a primary key, use the `PRIMARY KEY` keyword:

```sql
CREATE TABLE recipe (
  id integer PRIMARY KEY, 
  name varchar(20)
)
```

## Key Validation

### Information Schema

The information schema is a databse that contains meta information about object in the databse including tables, columns and contraints. This is part of the international SQL standard.

We can query this database to determine if a column as been designated correctly as a primary key.

```sql
SELECT 
  constraint_name, table_name, column_name
FROM 
  information_schema.key_column_usage
WHERE 
  table_name = 'recipe';
```

```bash
constraint_name | table_name | column_name 
-----------------+------------+-------------
 recipe_pkey     | recipe     | id
(1 row)
```

## Composite Primary Key

If no column in a row will uniquely identiy a reocrd, then multiple columns together can serve as a primary key, a composite primary key. To designate such a relationship, we would use the following syntax:

```sql
CREATE TABLE popular_recipes (
  recipe_id varchar(20), 
  ingredient_id varchar(20).
  downloaded integer,
  PRIMARY KEY (recipe_id, ingredient_id)
)
```

## Foreign Key

A foreign key is the presence of the primary key of another table’s record within the record of another table to signify the relationship of the two records.

In design, when deciding which table should have the foreign key, you should think about which one can exist without the other. Imagine a `person` and an `email` table. An email cannot really exist without having a person to create it, *and* many emails can belong to the same person, while a person can exist without an email. It makes sense to put the foreign key in the email

| person |
| ------ |
| **id** |
| name   |
| age    |

| email       |
| ----------- |
| **email**   |
| *person_id* |
| storage     |
| price       |

To designate a foreign key on a column in Postgres, use the `REFERENCES` keyword:

```sql
CREATE TABLE person (
  id integer PRIMARY KEY,
  name varchar(20),
  age integer
);

CREATE TABLE email (
  email varchar(20) PRIMARY KEY,
  person_id integer REFERENCES person(id),
  storage integer,
  price money
);
```

With these keys in place we can then query the tables together without a `JOIN`

```sql
SELECT person.name AS name, email.email AS email
FROM person, email
WHERE person.id = email.person_id;
```

