# What are Database Relationships?

## Introduction

There are three types of database relationships:

- one-to-one
- one-to-many
- many-to-many

## One-to-One Relationship

Just as it sounds, a one-to-one relationship is one where there is a relationship between two records that can only occuer once in either direction. So, a `licence` and a `driver` table, in both of these tables, there can only be one `licence_id` since the drivers must be unique and only have one license, and the licenses must be unique and only have one driver.

So table1_column must be contrained to uniqueness and only allow one value from table2, and table2_column must be contrained to uniqueness and only allow one value from table1.

This can be specified through a Foreign Key and th use of the `UNIQUE` keyword.

```sql
CREATE TABLE driver (
    license_id char(20) PRIMARY KEY,
    name varchar(20),
    address varchar(100),
    date_of_birth date
);      

CREATE TABLE license (
    id integer PRIMARY KEY,
    state_issued varchar(20),
    date_issued date,
    date_expired  date,
    license_id char(20) REFERENCES driver(license_id) UNIQUE
);
```

## One-to Many Relationships

One to many relationships  *must*  be represented in muliple tables, unlike one-to-one relationships. Since storing in one table would result in the duplication of suposedly unique primary keys.

We represent one-to-many relationships with a parent and child table, where the parent is the one that can have many children. The child will store the foreign key that matches the parent table’s primary key.

Example of a join with this relationship

```sql
SELECT 
  book.title AS book_title,
  chapter.title AS chapter_title,
  page.content AS page_content
FROM book
JOIN chapter
  ON book.isbn = chapter.book_isbn
JOIN page
  ON chapter.id = page.chapter_id;
```

## Many-to-Many Relationships

A many-to-many relationship is the combination of two one-to-many relationships. i.e. a student can have many classes, and a class can have many students.

So to represent these relationships we need to have three tables, one for each of the tow things that are related an a thrid ‘join’ table that will have two constraints

- foreign keys that reference primary keys of the two member tables
- a composite primary key made up of two foreign keys

Here’s an example of a join table to express the relationships between a book table and an author table, where a book can have many authors and an author can have many books:

```sql
CREATE TABLE books_authors (
  book_isbn varchar(50) REFERENCES book(isbn),
  author_email varchar(50) REFERENCES author(email),
  PRIMARY KEY (book_isbn, author_email)
);
```

