# Database Triggers

## What is a Trigger?

“a database trigger is procedural code that is automatically executed in response to certain events on a particular table or view in a database. The trigger is mostly used for maintaining the integrity of the information on the database.” - Wikipedia

In other words, something that you want to occur every time a certain query is called, or a certain view is seen.

## How are Triggers Activated?

To call ac function and configure a trigger, use the following syntax:

```sql
CREATE TRIGGER <trigger_name>
BEFORE UPDATE ON <table_name>
FOR EACH ROW
EXECUITY PROCEDURE<function>;
```

- Postgres may use `EXECUTE FUNCTION` instead, but they are functionally equivalent.

A trigger function may look like

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION check_account_update() RETURNS
TRIGGER AS $$
  BEGIN 
    NEW.active:= 1;
    RETURN NEW;
  END;
$$ LANGUAGE PLPGSQL;
```

Then set the function as the trigger target

```sql
CREATE TRIGGER check_update
  BEFORE UPDATE ON accounts
  FOR EACH ROW
EXECUTE PROCEDURE check_account_update();
```

With this example, any time an `UPDATE` staement is used in the accounts table, the modified rows would have the `active` column set to 1.

Triggers can also be set on `INSERT` `DELETE` AND `TRUNCATE` .

## When is a Trigger Activated?

You can activate a trigger `BEFORE` meaning that an `UPDATE` or `INSERT` query can be edited by the function.

A trigger can also be activated `AFTER` meaning that it will wait for the query's work to finish before executing.

## What Records are Modified by a Trigger?

To impact each of the rows that is impacted by a related query, use `FOR EACH ROW` .

To call the function once for every query, rather than every record, use `FOR EACH STATEMENT` .

There are speed and logical considerations to make. Even small functions will add up on processing power and take significant time to accpmplish if called on thousands or millions of records.

## Can I Focus my Triggers?

Using a `WHEN` clause you can specify that a trigger only run when certain conditions are fulfilled. So, you could have another field in a record update when a certain field crosses a threshold set by the trigger.

```sql
CREATE TRIGGER insert_trigger_high
BEFORE INSERT ON clients
FOR EACH ROW
WHEN (NEW.total_spent >= 1000)
EXECUTE PROCEDURE high_spender();
```

```sql
CREATE TRIGGER insert_trigger_low
BEFORE INSERT ON clients
FOR EACH ROW
WHEN (NEW.total_spent < 1000)
EXECUTE PROCEDURE not_a_high_spender();
```

## Things to Consider

If a statement causes multiple triggers to fire, they will fire in alphabetical order.

Since `SELECT` statements do not modify rows, you cannot set a trigger on a `SELECT` statement.

You can create chains of triggers. An `INSERT` command may fire a trigger that causes an update, which will then fire and `UPDATE` trigger.

## Removing Triggers

To remove a trigger use `DROP TRIGGER` with the name of the trigger and the table name.

```sql
DROP TRIGGER insert_trigger ON customers;
```

To see your triggers, call a `SELECT` statement on the `information_schema.triggers` table

```sql
SELECT * FROM information_schema.triggers;
```

