# Three Tier Architecture

## What is a three tier application?

Tiers separate processes that will be used in an application. In the three-tier application, the tiers are the **presentation tier**, **application tier**, and the **data tier**. Each of these tiers can run on their onw infrastructure to allow for easier scalability when the application expands.

## The Presentation Tier

This representst the user interaction, the GUI. It will handle the way that users will interact with an application. Most users never have to think about the other tiers of an applcation.

Mostly markup languages: HTML, JS, CSS.

## The Data Tier

Where data is **stored**. Not where it is manipulated. It is strictly stored in this layer. It is usually made up of a database.

The data tier can only interact with the application tier, it is isolated from the presentation tier.

SQL, MongoDB, PostgreSQL. However, even the querying of the database is not considered part of the Data Tier.

## The Application Tier

The bulk of the whole application. It manipulates data and passes requests and information between the data and the presentation layers.

Java, Python, Perl, and many other popular programming languages.

## Why use tiered architecture?

With tiers, its easier to spearate into teams and to scale an application to have dedicated people working on parts of the project. This also allows for changes to a tier, or upgrades, without having to make large scale changes to the other tiers, making scaling easier.

## Other tiered architectures

There is also **two-tiered architecuture**, with only a presentation tier and a data tier.

There are also **n-tiered architecture**. Meaning that there can be more than three tiers, as you can add as many tiers as you want. But, the more tiers, the more complexity is introduced.

