# How Computers Work

## Input

Input is how people physically interact with coputers. We give our computers commands through physical sensors that get turned into data for the computer to process.

Our input devices must establish a connection with the computer’s motherboard.

An input device *detects* and *reports* any type of event. It will send that report to the CPU. This reporting is done in binary.

## Processing

The central processing unit or CPU handles this aspect of computers. It will take the data reported and then decide how to execute the request that we are intending.

The CPU bridges the hardware and the software of the computer.

The CPU has to handle many different requests quickly and keep programs running simultaneously. This is where memory comes in handy.

## Memory

Memory is the where computer-based data is temporarily or permanently stored. We will use different types of hardware to store this memory based on how long we need to keep it.

### Primary Memory

Data that we only need to execute a specific task will be store in random access memory or RAM. This is the primary memory of the CPU. This data is stored temporarily and once the program ceases to run, or we turn off the computer, that data will be lost.

RAM is signifcantly faster to read and write from than secondary memory.

### Secondary Memory

When we need a place to permenantly store information so that it can be accessed again. This is usually on a hard drive.

## Output

The output is the result of the processing that happened from the input. We also connect output devices to our computers like monitors, speakers and printers.

Notice that in those examples, each of the devices operates as both an input and an output device.

Output is the final step in our interaction with the computer.

