# IO Hardware

## Introduction to IO Hardware

I/O devices refer to any physical devices that interact with a CPU. Input devices send information to the computer, and output devices represent information from the computer.

**Human readable devices** - can be interpreted/understood in natural langue structure by humans

**Machine readable devices** - formatted to allow communication between hardware without human interpretation. Hard drives, controllers, SD cards

**Communication devices** - allow devices to interact over a network. Modems, switches, routers, bluetooth

## Drivers & Controllers

Device **drivers** are software programs that are used by the OS to communicate with the **controllers**, or hardware that works as an interface between physical IO devices and the device drivers.

Device controllers are a translator between the OS and the hardware, and drivers are the service that provides that translator.

## Transferring Data

There are three different ways that devices are designed to read or write data (the operations necessary to transfer data).

**Character devices** -

- sequential series of bytes that are accessed one byte at a time
- OS uses read/write system calls
- USB

**Block devices -**

- memory stored in fixed-size blocks
- Block devices allow “random access” - you do not need to write sequentially
- Blocks are typically 512 bytes or more
- Hard disks

**Network devices -**

- Require a different interface than character and block devices
- Ethernet card

## Blocking vs. Non-blocking

When an IO device makes a request, an applicationcan respond in a blocking or non-blocking way.

### Blocking Requests

Most IO requests are blocking. Requires that the process is stopped while it waits for an input/output. Like a word processor, the processs halts while waiting for the user to type words in.

The application will stop executing requests between user input and output.

### Non-blocking Requests

A non-blocking request is an asynchronous request, where the request is acknowledged and added to an event pool that is organized in a queue. Like a collaborative application where multiple users are sending multimple requests.

## Interrupts & Polling

An interrupt is a hardware mechanism that sends a signal. The CPU is triggered and the CPU will immediately halt the task it is working on and send the interrupt over to an interrupt handler that queues the interrupts sent to the CPU. After the interrupt has been responded to the CPU goes back to its task.

Polling is similar to interrupts, but it is a CPI protocol. At regular intervals, the CPI will check on any IO devices that require requests to be responded to.

## Memory-mapped IO vs Direct-Memory Access

*Memory-mapped IO* - a system designed to allow an IO device and the memory of a computer to share address space to the interface

- allows similar sets of instructions to be used over multiple hardware components
- io devices are not treated differently from other memory devices
- separate instruction not required for device to communicate with a computer

*Direct Memory access (DMA)* - IO devices have direct access to the main memeroy without as much involvement with the CPU

- requires a direct-memory access controller
- removes CPU overhead that comes from managing IO tasks
- can result in cach coherency discrepancies where the main memory is updated directly by DMA and the computer’s cache is out of sync with memory

