# IO Software

## Introduction to IO Software

*IO Software* is the code that interprets io signals and plans the execution of the IO requests. Some software is generic and can be used for entire classes of devices, and some are very specific to the type of device.

## User-space, Kernel-space, & Hardware

*User-space* is the space in memory that holds and runs user processes. User processes can access the kernel through calls and get output from them. User libraries hold complex, modifiable, user-controlled code that interfaces with the kernel.

*Kernel-space* is the space in memory where the kernel performs functionality. The kernel manages cheduling of tasks, buffering (storing data in memory when transferrign between a computer and IO deivces), spooling (holding output data for an IO deivce), etc.

## Layers of IO Systems

**User-level IO software of user processes:** IO requests are made like a system call in user-space to be sent to the kernel space

**Device-independent software:** generic software components that are applicable to multiple deivces.

**Device drivers:** specific software to an IO device. Often have code cnippets that were developed by the manufacturer and they must be installed before the IO device works with the computer.

**Interrupt handlers:** code that provides functionality to device drivers

**Hardware**: the physical IO deivce that interacts with the drivers

## Device Drivers

The code in drivers are part of the kernel-space because they don’t require user involvement to run.

Two types or device drivers:

- **Kernel-mode drivers**: allow basic functionality on a CPU and even contribute to teh start-up of an OS
- **User-mode drivers**: the addition of hardware to the computer that requires drivers to be installed

# Device-Independent IO Software

Includes generic interface calls, buffering, generic block sizes for IO deivces, etc. — things that can be used by any device.

## Interrupt Handlers

Software components that manage the pool of interrupts that are sent to the CPU. These receive and acknowledge that a signal has been received, place it in a queue, and execute the interrupts by priority.

When the handler receives an interrupt it notifies the CPU the CPU will halt its current process to handle the queue.

