# Important Hardware

## The CPU

Central Processing Unit - electronic circutry that executes instructions based on binary input data

Three components:

- Control Unit (CU)
- Arithmetic and Logic Unit (ALU)
- Registers (Immediate Access Store)

### Control Unit

The control unit coordinates all activities of the CPU and keeps the hardware syncronized with a clock that sends electronic pulses keeping everything on schedule. It decides what processes are executed and when, it accepts and routes the inputs and returns outputs with integrity.

### ALU

There are two areas of processing done here, the arithmetic operations that calculate data, and the logic operations that compare data. This is the most basic form of processing that occurs, and it enables every interaction from calculation of pixel changes and many many more operations.

### Registers

These are memory stores that are small and high-speed located directly on the CPI. There are typically 8, 16, 32, or 64 registers depending on the architecture. When values that are critically needed by the ALU processing they will likely be stored here.

## Memory

### Random Access Memory

Additional high-speed memory that a computer will use to store and access information on a short-term basis. The speed and amount of RAM is directly correlated with the performance of the computer. RAM is the primary volatile memory. It is wiped as soon as power is disconnected.

### Buses

A “bus” is a “job-specific high-speed wire.” There are three different types of buses:

- data buses - processor and other componenets
- address buses - unidirectional transmission of location of pieces of data in memory from processor
- control buses - unidirectional tranmission of clock and instruction signals

### Hard Disks

Long-term or secondary storage of data and programs. This memory is non-volatile, it retains information.

### Additional Hardware

- Mainboard/Motherboard - circut borard that houses cpu, hard drive, usb devices and others through ports. It allows communication
- Ports - physical outlets that enable IO (input/output)

