# Synchronization

## Introduction to Synchronization

Synchronization ensures that multi-threded programs use shared resources safely.

Data must be shared between threads when processes are broken down into mutiple threads, the places where that shared data is used is called a *critical section*.

All critical secions need three properties to ensure that programs are synchronized:

1. *Mutual exclusion* - only one thread can be inside the critical section at a time
2. *Progress*: if no thread is inside the critical section, then a thread trying to acces it must be allowed to do so
3. *Bounded waiting*: each thread waiting to access the critical section must, at some point, gain access

## Race Conditions

*Deterministic* - an outcome that is not in any way dependent on chance.

We want programs to be deterministic, unless elements of randomness are explicitly included. We want our programs to run the same every time.

Single-threaded programs are inherently deterministic.

In multi-threaded programs, seqential order of tasks is not guaranteed, making them *non-deterministic*. If this affects the result of the program is is called a *race condition*.

## Locking

To fix the problem of multi-threaded programs falling out of sync, and creating non-deterministic programs, we can use a mutual exclusion lock or a mutex. We can lock critical sections of our programs, meaning that until one thread has finished its operation on the critical section, all other threads trying to access it will be blocked.

## Condition Variables

There will be times that a program is only supposed to run when a variable fulfills a certain condition. We could continuously lock, check, and unlock the variable, but this would be very inefficient. A better way to would be to use a condition variable to notify the other function when the variable has been met. Within the function waiting for notification, we will call a wait function that will free the mutex and allow the critical section to be modified, ensuring that the function will continue to execute while waiting.

## Atomic Variables

Instead of using locks and conditions, we could also declare a variable with the `atomic_int` type. This means that alterations to the variable happen in a thread-safe manner: in exactly one atomic step, rather than adding to a register and then modifying it and then sending it back. Since the modification couldn't happen concurrently with any other step, we will not wind up with a race condition.

## Semaphores

Imagine this problem: We have a producer and a consumer. The producer can only hold a certain amount of values, and the consumer cannot take any values if the producer is not storing them in a buffer.

To perform synchornous operations, we could lock buffer each time the producer wanted to add a value to check if there is available space, and lock thebuffer ach time the consumer wanted to pull a value, ensuring that there is a value to grab. But, if we had hundreds of operations, they would all have to wait on one another.

Instead, we can use *semaphores*, which are integers that can keep track of values. In this case, `num_free` and `num_occupied` so that we know that status of the buffer without locking it.

Using semaphores we can make the producer and consumer wait for a condition that will lead to successful execution without the program having to block all other processes from seeing the buffer and causing non-deterministic outcomes.

