# Filesystems

## Introduction to Filesystems

The *filesystem* is a data structure that the OS uses to store and retrieve data. This is a software abstraction that aloows developers to manipulate data without having to be concerned with how the storage of each device works.

In a *filesystem*, data is organized into *files*. Each file has a format that depends on the contents and encoding of the file.

## File Metadata, Permissions, and Attributes

Metadata is kept that helps to manage these files. This metadata is stored in the **file control block**. Metadata may include:

- permissions
- owners
- sizes
- create, modify and access times
- etc

There are other attributes that can be assigned that will cause a file to have specific behavior:

- Hidden: not viewable by default
- Immutable: cannot modify or delete
- Compressed: in a compressed form to save space

## File Permissions Overview

There are three main actions that we can control permissions on for users and also for groups.

- Read
- Write
- Execute

In Unix operating systems: Linux, and Mac. There are 10 characters that represent the permissions.

The first character will indicate whether the permission string is for a file (`-`) or a directory (`d` ).

The permissions are then deliniated in three triads of `rwx` which stand for read, write, and execute. The first triad is permissions for the owner, the second are permissions fo the group and the third are permissions for any other user.

Here is an example of a file permission string that has read, write, and execute for the owner, read and write for the group and read for other users.

`-rwxrw-r—`

And now, only read for all:

`-r—r—r--`

Or full permission given to everyone:

`-rwxrwxrwx`

## Hardware Representation of Data

On a hard disk, information is stored by etching data into a magnetic disk with a head that hovers over the disk and adjusts the magnetic field at a precise location.

Information on a disk is organized into sectors. These can be created in different sizes, if we have small sectors than the disk must be indexed, which makes finding files very slow and creates substatial overhead for documenting the location and content of each sector. However, if we use sectors that are too big then, we can wind up with a lot of wasted space when sectors are not filled by files.

## The Layers of a Filesystem

The layers of a filesystem describe the levels of abstraction that sit between the magnetic changes to the disk and the programmer sitting with a text editor manipulating files.

**Application Programs**: Programs run by the user, web browers and text editors

**Logical File System**: The system that manages the file control blocks with the metadata of the files. This simplifies the access to files for applications

**File-Organization Module**: Responsible for organizing the software blocks of the filesystem. Simplifies hardware differences between storage devices for the logical file system

**Basic File System**: Communication between the software block and hardware sector. Schedules IO requests and manages resource blocks

**IO Control**: low-level software drivers that communicate with the storage device's controller.

**Devices**: Mechanizsm of the physical storage device. Motors and controls, disks etc.

## File Operations

In unix:

- `touch` - create a file
- `ls` - list the contets of a directory
- `echo` - print a string
- `>` - an operator that will redirect text output to a file
- `cat` - output a file's contents
- `rm` - remove a file

## Directory Operations

In unix:

- `mkdir` - create an emtpy directory
- `ls` - list contents of a directory
   - `ls -R` - recursively display a directory and its contained directories
- `rm -r` - remove a directory with its contents - `-r` is recursive

