# Why Test?

[Software Errors Cost U.S. Economy $59.5 Billion Annually: NIST Assesses Technical Needs of Industry to Improve Software-Testing](https://web.archive.org/web/20090610052743/http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/releases/n02-10.htm)

### Manual Testing

- This is what it sounds like, interacting with the program the way that a user might and trying to create all possible outcomes to see if there's any unexpected outcomes.
- Nonexpected behavior is called an error or a bug.

### Automated Testing

- Use of software to control the execution of tests and the comparison of actual behavior to expected behavior.

### The Test Suite

- Test code is the same as rest of the code in the web app but serves a different purpose.
- The code that defines the application is called *implementation code*, and the code defining tests is called *test code*
- Test code is included with and structured similary to the implementation code.
- index.js >>> index-test.js

### Tests as Documentation

- Tests as documentation provide a unique form of documentation:
   - human-readable text to describe the application
   - machine-executable code to confirm the app works as described.

```javascript
it('accepts the customer name', () => {
  const name = 'Hungry Person';

  browser.url('/');
  browser.setValue('#name', name);
  browser.click('#submit-order');
  browser.url('/');

  assert.include(browser.getText('#deliver-to'), name);
});
```

### Regression

- When adding new code or features, sometimes this can cause errors in previos code. This is called *regression.*
- When funcionality proviously developed and tested stops working, you can say that it’s *functionally regressed*.

