# Props

### props

- Informatino that gets passed from one component to another is known as *props*
- Props can be used to customize the output of each component depending on the input

### Access a Component’s props

- Every component has `props`
- A component’s `props` is an object. It holds information about that component.
- Props are to components as arguments are to functions.
- Access a component’s `props` object by `props.name` this would return the `name` property from the component’s `props` object

### Pass `props` to a Component

- We pass information to a `props` object by giving our components attributes.

```javascript
<Greeting name="Jamel" />
```

```javascript
<SloganDisplay message="We're great!" />
```

- To pass information to a component, you need a *name* for the information you're passing. A name like `name` or `message`
- If you want to pass information that isn’t a string, wrap it in curlies

```javascript
<Greeting myInfo={["Astronaut", "Narek", "43"]} />

<Greeting name="The Queen Mary" city="Long Beach, California" age={56} haunted={true} />
```

### Render a Component’s props

- To make sure that a function component can use the `props` object, define your function component with `props` as the parameter

```javascript
function Button(props) {
  return <button>{props.displayText}</button>;
}
```

### Pass props From Component To Component

- Props travel in a one-way direction, from top to bottom, parent to child.

```javascript
function App() {
    return <Product name="Apple Watch" price = {399} rating = "4.5/5.0" />;
}
```

- `App` is the parent and `Product` is the child. `App` passes the props `name` , `price` , and `rating`
- Props passed down cannot be changed. To change them, the parent must add new values for the props.

### Render Different UI Based on props

- Use props to make decisions

```javascript
function LoginMsg(props) {
  if (props.password === 'a-tough-password') {
    return <h2>Sign In Successful.</h2>
  } else {
    return <h2>Sign In Failed..</h2>
  }
}
```

### Put an Event Handler in a Function Component

- You will often pass functions as `props` most especially you will pass *event handler* functions.
- We will define event handlers as a mothod on the function compoent - meaning that you will have to define it within the functional componenet that it needs to be used for.
- You can name a prop just about anything as long as it follows the [JS identifier rules](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Grammar_and_types#variables)

### Receive an Event Handler as a prop

- Now to make that do anything, you'll have to attach it to the element that you're trying to manipulate or have listen to.
- Use an event name for the *attribute* `onClick` or `onHover` and for the value, use the handler

### handleEvent, onEvent, and props.onEvent

- For event handlers we have to name two things in the parent element: 1. the hander function 2. the prop name.
- We can name this anything, but there are some naming conventions to follow.
- `handle[Event]` so it would be `handleClick` or `handleHover`
- Your prop names should be the word `on` plus the event type. So as in the above examples `onClick` or `onHover`

```javascript
// In Button.js: The onClick attribute creates an event listener:
<button onClick={props.onClick}>
  Click me!
</button> // This is JSX

// In Talker.js: The onClick attribute is just a normal attribute name.
<Button onClick={handleClick} /> // This is a component instance
```

### props.children

- Every `props` object has a property named `children`
- `props.children` returns everything between a component's opening and closing JSX tags
   - A component doesn’t need to be self-closing`<Component/>`  You can also use components like HTML tags: `<Component>` `</Component>` and `props.children` will return everything between the two
- If a self-closing tag is used `props.children` will return `undefined`

### Giving Default Values to props

- There are three methods to specify default values for props:
1. Add a `defaultProps` static property to the component

```javascript
function Example(props) {
  return <h1>{props.text}</h1>
}

Example.defaultProps = {
  text: 'This is default text',
};
```

2. Specify the default value directly in the function definition

```javascript
function Example({text='This is default text'}) {
   return <h1>{text}</h1>
}
```

3. Set the default value in the function body

```javascript
function Example(props) {
  const {text = 'This is default text'} = props;
  return <h1>{text}</h1>
}
```

