# Hooks

## The State Hook

### Why Use Hooks?

- Hooks are functions that allow us to manage the internal state fo components and handle post-rendering side effects directly from our function componenets.
- We can change what the user sees and define our UI based on the *state*
- Built-in hooks
   - `useState()`
   - `useEffect()`
   - `useContext()`
   - `useReducer()`
   - `useRef()`
   - [Full list of build-ins](https://react.dev/reference/react)

### Update Function Component State

- The **state hook** is the most common Hook used for building components in React
- Named export from the React library

```javascript
import React, { useState } from 'react';
```

- `useState()` returns an array with two values
   - *current state*: current value of the state
   - *state setter*: a function that updates the value of state
- We can destructure and assign to local variables

```javascript
const [currentState, setCurrentState] = useState();
```

- This creates a constant variable called `currentState` and a named setter function called `setCurrentState()`
- Example of a component using a state hook

```javascript
import React, { useState } from "react";

function Toggle() {
  const [toggle, setToggle] = useState();

  return (
    <div>
      <p>The toggle is {toggle}</p>
      <button onClick={() => setToggle("On")}>On</button>
      <button onClick={() => setToggle("Off")}>Off</button>
    </div>
  );
}
```

### Initialize State

- You can use the State Hook to check or change the states of all data types
- Booleans are commonly used to represent whether or not data is loading.

```javascript
import React, { useState } from 'react';

function ToggleLoading() {
  const [isLoading, setIsLoading] = useState();

  return (
    <div>
      <p>The data is {isLoading ? 'Loading' : 'Not Loading'}</p>
      <button onClick={() => setIsLoading(true)}>
        Turn Loading On
      </button>
      <button onClick={() => setIsLoading(false)}>
        Turn Loading Off
      </button>
    </div>
  );
}
```

- We can pass our initial value for a state to the `useState()` as an argument

```javascript
const [isLoading, setIsLoading] = useState(true);
```

- On the **first** render, the *initial* *state argument* will be used
- When a the state setter is called, React ignores the initial state argument and uses new value
- When the component re-renders, React continues to use the same value from the previous render
- Without an initial value, the state will return `undefined` before it is set.
- Typically fine for computers, but declaring an initial state is better for humans reading the code.
- If you don’t need a value, then pass `null`

### Use State Setter Outside of JSX

```javascript
import React, { useState } from 'react';

export default function EmailTextInput() {
  const [email, setEmail] = useState('');
  const handleChange = (event) => {
    const updatedEmail = event.target.value;
    setEmail(updatedEmail);
  }

  return (
    <input value={email} onChange={handleChange} />
  );
}
```

- Use array destructuring to create the local state variable `email` and local setter function `setEmail()`
- Convention is to name your setter variable using the current state variable with `set` prepended
- It’s a good idea to write our event handlers separate from our JSX when we’re doing more than just calling the state setter with a ssstatic value, so that the code is more readable.

From:

```javascript
const handleChange = (event) => {
  const newEmail = event.target.value;
  setEmail(newEmail);
}
```

To:

```javascript
const handleChange = (event) => setEmail(event.target.value);
```

Or:

```javascript
const handleChange = ({target}) => setEmail(target.value);
```

### Set From Previous State

- React state updates are *asynchronous*
- Best practice is to update a state with a callback function so that you don’t have accidental outdatted values

```javascript
import React, { useState } from 'react';
 
export default function Counter() {
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0);
 
  const increment = () => setCount(prevCount => prevCount + 1);
 
  return (
    <div>
      <p>Wow, you've clicked that button: {count} times</p>
      <button onClick={increment}>Click here!</button>
    </div>
  );
}
```

- Since the `count` value depends on the previous `count` value, the `setCount()` state setter is called with a callback function instead of a value
- When a state setter is called with a callback function, the argument of the function will be the previous value of the variable.

### Arrays in State

- Arrays are the best data model for managing and rendering JSX lists

```javascript
import React, { useState } from 'react';

//Static array of pizza options offered. 
const options = ['Bell Pepper', 'Sausage', 'Pepperoni', 'Pineapple'];

export default function PersonalPizza() {
  const [selected, setSelected] = useState([]);

  const toggleTopping = ({target}) => {
    const clickedTopping = target.value;
    setSelected((prev) => {
     // check if clicked topping is already selected
      if (prev.includes(clickedTopping)) {
        // filter the clicked topping out of state
        return prev.filter(t => t !== clickedTopping);
      } else {
        // add the clicked topping to our state
        return [clickedTopping, ...prev];
      }
    });
  };

  return (
    <div>
      {options.map(option => (
        <button value={option} onClick={toggleTopping} key={option}>
          {selected.includes(option) ? 'Remove ' : 'Add '}
          {option}
        </button>
      ))}
      <p>Order a {selected.join(', ')} pizza</p>
    </div>
  );
}
```

- In this example `options` is an array containing static data, it's generally best to define this outside of the component so they don't need to be recreated each time the component re-renders
- The `selected` array contains *dynamic data*, that changes usually based on a user's actions.
- `selected` is initialized as an empty array,
- When a button is clicked, the `toggleTopping()` event handler is called
   - The value of the button is assigned to `clickedTopping`
   - The `setSelected` function takes an anonymous function as an argument that assigns the previous value of `selected`  to `prev` and checks, using a conditional, whether `clickedTopping` is included in the array assigned to `prev`
   - If true, the previous value of `selected` is filtered using a function where `t` is each item in the `selected` array. It will only retain items that are *not* equal to `t` in a new array which is returned and replaces `prev`
   - If false, and `selected` does not include `clickedTopping` , it is added to our state  using **spread syntax** `…prev` - The return statement on line 18 is just an array where `clickedTopping` is our variable that we're adding and `…prev` is the rest of the array. In this example, we are *prepending* the new topping to the `selected` array
   - In the JSX:
      - Note the use of `.map()` to create many buttons for each of the items in `options`
      - Note the use of the ternary operator to decide the text of the button

### Objects in State

```javascript
export default function Login() {
  const [formState, setFormState] = useState({});
  const handleChange = ({ target }) => {
    const { name, value } = target;
    setFormState((prev) => ({
      ...prev,
      [name]: value
    }));
  };

  return (
    <form>
      <input
        value={formState.firstName}
        onChange={handleChange}
        name="firstName"
        type="text"
      />
      <input
        value={formState.password}
        onChange={handleChange}
        type="password"
        name="password"
      />
    </form>
  );
}
```

- On line 5, you'll see that we wrapped the curly braces in parentheses, this is the syntax that we must use to specify that we're returning another object (rather than just declaring a function)
- On line 7, the `name` of the target object, which is being used to identify the property being updated, is wrapped in square brackets. This is a **computed property name**, which just means that the string value in `name` can be used as a property.
   - I’m not sure why this requires a different notation… Aren’t we doing the same thing with the value?
   - Answer: this can be done using bracket notation outside of the literal notation `object[‘key’] = value`  but within an object literal, to make sure you're actually accessing a variable, you have to use square brackets.

### Separate Hooks for Separate States

- Managing dynamic data is much easier when we keep our data models as simple as possible
- It’s best to create multiple state vairables based on which values tend to change together

Example of cluttered states:

```javascript
function Subject() {
  const [state, setState] = useState({
    currentGrade: 'B',
    classmates: ['Hasan', 'Sam', 'Emma'],
    classDetails: {topic: 'Math', teacher: 'Ms. Barry', room: 201},
    exams: [{unit: 1, score: 91}, {unit: 2, score: 88}]
  })}
```

Refactored

```javascript
function Subject() {
  const [currentGrade, setGrade] = useState('B');
  const [classmates, setClassmates] = useState(['Hasan', 'Sam', 'Emma']);
  const [classDetails, setClassDetails] = useState({topic: 'Math', teacher: 'Ms. Barry', room: 201});
  const [exams, setExams] = useState([{unit: 1, score: 91}, {unit: 2, score: 88}]);
  // ...
}
```

- It is longer, however, each attribute can be set independent of the others. In the first example to change the state we would have to access properities, and then edit the object or array or string stored in that property, create a new array, and *then* create a new Subject object. This will be likely to have bugs

### Review

`const [currentState, stateSetter] = useState( initialState );`

`setArrayState((prev) => [ ...prev ])` and `setObjectState((prev) => ({ ...prev })).`

## The Effect Hook

### Why Use useEffect?

- After a component renders, we can use an Effect Hook to
   - fetch data from a back-end service
   - subscribe to a stream of data
   - manage timers and intervals
   - read form and make changes to the DOM
- Three key moments that the Effect Hook can be utilized is:
   - When the component is first added, or *mounted*, to the DOM and renders
   - When the state or props change, causing the component to re-render
   - When the component is reemoved, or *unmounted,* from the DOM

### Function Component Effects

- An effect hook tells our component to do something every time it's rendered or re-rendered.
- If we wanted to use the Effect Hook to allow a user to change the title of the web page tab when they type we could use this code:

```javascript
import React, { useState, useEffect } from 'react';
 
function PageTitle() {
  const [name, setName] = useState('');
 
  useEffect(() => {
    document.title = `Hi, ${name}`;
  });
 
  return (
    <div>
      <p>Use the input field below to rename this page!</p>
      <input onChange={({target}) => setName(target.value)} 
             value={name} 
             type='text' />
    </div>
  );
}
```

- The `useEffect()` function has no return value as the Effect Hook is used to call another function
- It accepts the argument of the callback function, or *effect* to run after a component renders.
- So in this example, every time the `PageTitle()` component renders, the Effect will run.
- The `onChange` listener triggers the `PageTitle` component to be re-rendered every time the user types in the input
- The order that `useEffect()` is placed in the code matters, but I don't totally understand this yet.

### Clean Up Effects

- Effects sometimes require **cleanup**
- If we add event listeners to the DOM, it’s important to remove those event listeners when we are done with them to avoid memory leaks

```javascript
useEffect(() => {
  document.addEventListener('keydown', handleKeyPress);
  // Specify how to clean up after the effect:
  return () => {
    document.removeEventListener('keydown', handleKeyPress);
  };
})
```

- If the effect doesn't have a *cleanup function*, a new event listener is added to the DOM's `document` object every time the component re-renders. This will cause bugs, performance issues, and crashes.
- Since effects run after every render (not just once) React calls the cleanup function before each re-render and before unmounting to clean up each effect call.
- The `useEffect()` Hook will always treat a returned function as a cleanup function.
- Order of operation
   1. Component mounts
   2. useEffect executes
   3. state changes
   4. cleanup function
   5. re-render
   6. useEffect executes
   7. cleanup function
   8. Component unmounts

### Control When Effects Are Called

- The first argument of the `useEffect()` Hook determines what function will be called when the Effect is executed, but the second argument can determine the timing of the function or whether or not to skip executing it.
- To make an effect run only on the mounting (or first render) of a Component, then you can pass an empty array `[]` as the second argument.
- There will be more on how to use this array, but `useEffect()` always accepts an array as its second argument. This array is called the **dependency array**

### Fetch Data

- When builidng software, start with default behaviors and then modify to improve performance
- When our effect is responsible fro fetching data from a server, we want to be efficient with how many times the effect is called.
- If the data won’t change, then an empty dependency array will be used, so that you don’t have to continually update it
- To save us time on renders, we can use the effect to call the data on the first render, and then use the state setter from the State Hook to store the server’s data in a local component state for future renders
   - This is a pattern used frequently in React which saves us from fetching new data every render
- The empty dependency array specifices that there are **no dependencies** meaning, that the result of running the effect won't change, so it only has to be run once.
- If the dependency array has something in it, it will signal the Event Hook to skip calling the effect on re-renders *unless* one of the variables in our dependency array has changed.

```javascript
useEffect(() => {
  document.title = `You clicked ${count} times`;
}, [count]); // Only re-run the effect if the value stored by count changes
```

### Rules of Hooks

1. Only call Hooks at the top level
   - Never call them in loops, conditions, or nested functions
1. Only call Hooks from React functions
   - Hooks can only be used within function components or Custom Hooks

### Separate Hooks for Separate Effects

- We may want to group related data together in an object, however, we will want to use separate effect calls for each managing action on different data

```javascript
// Handle both position and menuItems with one useEffect hook.
const [data, setData] = useState({ position: { x: 0, y: 0 } });
useEffect(() => {
  get('/menu').then((response) => {
    setData((prev) => ({ ...prev, menuItems: response.data }));
  });
  const handleMove = (event) =>
    setData((prev) => ({
      ...prev,
      position: { x: event.clientX, y: event.clientY }
    }));
  window.addEventListener('mousemove', handleMove);
  return () => window.removeEventListener('mousemove', handleMove);
}, []);
```

Refactored:

```javascript
// Handle menuItems with one useEffect hook.
const [menuItems, setMenuItems] = useState(null);
useEffect(() => {
  get('/menu').then((response) => setMenuItems(response.data));
}, []);

// Handle position with a separate useEffect hook.
const [position, setPosition] = useState({ x: 0, y: 0 });
useEffect(() => {
  const handleMove = (event) =>
    setPosition({ x: event.clientX, y: event.clientY });
  window.addEventListener('mousemove', handleMove);
  return () => window.removeEventListener('mousemove', handleMove);
}, []);
```

