# Writing Tests for React Applications Using Jest and Enzyme

[Writing Tests for React Applications Using Jest and Enzyme | CSS-Tricks](https://css-tricks.com/writing-tests-for-react-applications-using-jest-and-enzyme/)

- Enzyme is designed to test componenets and it's a great way to write assertions (or scenarios) that simulate actions that confirm the front-end UI is working correctly.
- Jest comes out of the box with create-react-app, but we still have to install `enzyme` and `enzyme-adapter-react-16` (the number should be based on the version of React that you're using
- Run create-react-app without an install

```javascript
$ npx create-react-app my-app
```

- Add enzyme dependencies

```javascript
$ npm install enzyme enzyme-adapter-react-16 --save-dev
```

- Now we have to set up a file for our tests

```javascript
import { configure } from 'enzyme';
import Adapter from 'enzyme-adapter-react-16';
configure({ adapter: new Adapter() });
```

- This installs Enzyme and sets up the adapter for running tests

### Taking snapshots of tests

- Snapshots are not actual images, rather they test the application in one of the states it could be in, so that we can compare UI behavior against the other states that it might take on
- When you run a new test, a **snapshot** is taken of the component code, and its saved in a new `__snapshots__` folder in the `src` directory.
- Here’s an example of a snapshot of a sucessful test of a sample project:

```javascript
it("renders correctly", () => {
  const wrapper = shallow(
    <App />
  );
  expect(wrapper).toMatchSnapshot();
})
```

Now run the test

```javascript
$ npm run test
```

- Every new snapshot that gets generated with the test suite runs will be saved in the `__tests__` folder. Jest checks to see if the componenet matches the snapshot on subsequent tests.
- So taking the example above, if we were to change the heading in the wrapper of <App/> the test would fail. We could make it pass again by either updating the component or the snapshot.
   - Jest will provide you instructions for how to update the snapshot from the command line so this doesn’t have to be done manually
- The `shallow()` method that we used in this test is from the Enzyme package and it instructs the tests to run a single componenet and nothing else -- not even child componenets inside of it!
   - This helps us to isolate our code and get better information when debugging.
- We also have the `render()` method for snapshot testing
   - This one includes the child componenets of the componenet that you are testing, and renders them to static HTML
- We also have `mount()` which will render the component (like shallow) and its children (like render) AND writes it to the DOM. So it can test interactivity.
   - Since this calls a full mount of the componenet, you’ll wnat to make a call to `.unmount` on the componenet after the test runs so it doesn't conflict iwth other tests

### Testing Componenet's Lifecycle Methods

- Lifecycle methods are hooks in React that are called at different stages of a component's lifespan (think API calls and such)
- Here’s an example of how we could test if a componenet mounts

```javascript
it('calls componentDidMount', () => {
  jest.spyOn(App.prototype, 'componentDidMount')
  const wrapper = shallow(<App/>)
  expect(App.prototype.componentDidMount.mock.calls.length).toBe(1)
});
```

- `.componentDidMount()` is the lifecycle method of the component (for reference, these are stored in the prototype of the component and you can view them in the DevTools)

### Testing component props

- The Enzyme API allows us to create a "mock" function so tests can simulate props being passed between components.
- In this example, we’ll pass user props from the main App componenet into a Profile component
   - Mock user props

```javascript
const user = {
  name: 'John Doe',
  email: 'johndoe@gmail.com',
  username: 'johndoe',
  image: null
}
```

   - Mock functions look like other tests because they're wrapped around componenets, but they use an addtional `describe` layer that takes the componenet being tested, then allows us to proceed by telling the test the expected props and values that we expect to be passed.

```javascript
describe ('<Profile />' () => {
  it ('contains h4', () => {
    const wrapper = mount(<Profile user={user} />)
    const value = wrapper.find('h4').text()
    expect(value).toEqual('John Doe')
  })
  it ('accepts user props', () => {
    const wrapper = mount(<Profile user={user} />);
    expect(wrapper.props().user).toEqual(user);
  })
})
```

   - The first test checks to see if the cooresponding element is rendering the correct prop by passing that prop into the test.
   - The second test checks to see if the props that we passed to the mounted component matches the props that we set eariler.

### Mock API calls

- We do this without actually hitting the API, to make sure that we're not paying extra for the calls.
- Here’s a more thorough walkthough of using [Jest to mock axios requests](https://css-tricks.com/using-data-in-react-with-the-fetch-api-and-axios/)
- First, create a new folder called `__mock__` in the same directory where our `__tests__` folder lives
- Create mock request files in this new folder

```javascript
module.exports = {
  get: jest.fn(() => {
    return Promise.resolve({
      data: [
        {
          id: 1,
          name: 'Jane Doe',
          email: 'janedoe@gmail.com',
          username: 'jdoe'
        }
      ]
    })
  })
}
```

- We need to check that the GET request is nade, so we import axios for that

```javascript
import axios from 'axios';
```

- Then just below the import statements Jest replaces axios with our mock

```javascript
jest.mock('axios')
```

- We have a `spyOn()` method that takes an `accessType?` argument which can check whether we were able to "get" data from an API call ⇒ We call `jest.spyOn()` to call the spied method, which we implemented in our `__mock__` file

```javascript
it('fetches a list of users', () => {
  const getSpy = jest.spyOn(axios, 'get')
  const wrapper = shallow(
    <App />
  )
  expect(getSpy).toBeCalled()
})
```

