# Introduction to DevOps

**DevOps** is a culture supported by practices and tools. This enables Development and Operations teams to work together, facilitating collaboration.

## Development vs. Operations Teams

Development team writes an application’s features.

Operations team creates and maintains teh infrastructure that the appliccation runs on.

Development team source code → Operations team to deploy

Developers are always tring to implement changes, which operations teams are attempting to keep things stable. So, these two groups of people tend to be at odds with one another.

## Benefits of DevOps

- Consistent development, testing, and production environments
- Fewer hand-offs and shared information and context
- Mangement of infrastructure with development tools

The goal of DevOps: faster delivery of reliable software.

## DevOps Culture

- Thinking about the whole production system, rather than a single department or feature
- Feedback loops allowing each part of the process to receive information an improve
- A culture of continuous experimentation and learning.

## DevOps Practices

- Automation: making manual processes occur automatically instead
- Continuous Itegration: regular merging of contributor code into a central repo
- Continious Deployment and Delivery: automatically preparing code changes for release
- Infrastructure as Code: representing aspects of infrastructure within source code files
- Microservices: dividing a business application into many small independent services
- Monitoring: gethering information about the state of the system during runtime.

## DevOps Tools

- Source Control Management: Git
- Environment: Configure the hardware and software for code
   - Docker and Kubernetes
- Automation tools:
   - GitHub Actions and Jenkins
- Infrastructure as code:
   - Docker, Chef, Terraform
- Testing
   - Mocha and Jest

