# Continuous Delivery and Deployment

Continuous Delivery automatees the preparation of software for deployment. After CI has built and tested the application, the app can move through staging, be tested again and prepare it for production.

Continuous Deployment automatically depoys an application to the production environment. It must be prepared by CI and CDelivery first though. Continuous deployment keeps the most recent version of our application in the customer’s hands.

## Handling Incomplete Features

When we are automatically building and pushing small changes, we have to handle features that are not finished yet.

- **Feature flags:** a technique that prvents users from accessing certain features through the use of simple conditional logic. (If this is the production environment, don't do this).
- **Dark launching:** similar to feature flags but with the condition that only certain users get to see the features

## The CI/CD Pipeline

1. Developer makes a change and commits the code.
2. The change is merged by CI
3. CI builds the changed codebase and runs initial tests.
4. The “delivery” part of CD puts the build onto testa nd staging environments.
5. Another set of tests are run by the “deliver” part of CD.
6. The, the “deployment” part of CD moves the build from staging to production.
7. Customers can (potentially) see the changes in the product.

### Pipeline Benefits

- Developing can become the sole focus with everything else automated
- Monitoring can give feedback from the pipeline that can lead to speed and quality imrpovements
- Frequent builds creates many old releases. There’s far more current releases to fall back on when something goes wrong.

## Completeing the Pipeline

1. Ensure CI practices in the project
2. Configure the CD server to deploy builds to test and staging environments automatically
3. Write post-deployment tests which trigger after continuous delivery.
4. Monitor the deployments and alert if any problems arise.
5. Configure the CD server to deploy to a production environment if no issues occur.

