# DevOps Culture

## Systems-Level Thinking

Development and operations teams are going to default to only seeing the things that directly involve their teams, their tasks. DevOps seeks to get everyone to see the larger picture through thinking at the system-level, involving multiple perspectives. One of the ways that a DevOps culture can do this is by create diverse teams, like a development team with an operations member and vice versa.

When the big-picture can’t be seen because everything is siloed, bottlenecks are very difficult to uncover.

## Continuous Learning and Experimentation

Process improvement is part of the job in DevOps. With integrated Development and Operations teams, a variety of inefficiencies shouuld be exposed and these things should be simplified or automated. A DevOps culture should also implement **blameless retrospectives**, after a sprint, issue resolution or project to see where areas of improvement and success are.

## Feedback Loops

### Metrics

Monitoring should be built into applications build processes and deployments so that defects can be discovered and developers have insight into how to create more quality code.

It’s vital to only get the important metrics, everything can be tracked, but only some of the information is useful:

- time to load
- issue to resolution time
- time to new feature release

### Shifting Left

The futher a bug makes it in the development lifecycle, the more costly it is to fix. Devops seeks to discover defects as early as possible, this is a strategy called shifting left.

### Builidng Quality In

DevOps is about integration. Security and accessibilitiy teams can also be integrated to see what areas of an application need work. Referring to outside sources and considering the quality of the application from start to finish is called building quality in.

