# Types of Infrastructure

## Traditional Infrastructure

On premesis. The company must acquire, configure, and maintain a physical infrastructure to host and serve software products. This gives companies the highest level of control and flexibilitiy with how to serve content (before the cloud in most cases now), but, it also opens up way more possibilities of mismatched versioning on machines and inconsistent bugs that are hard to catch. With physical machines, lots of capacity and CPU can go to waste as well.

## Virtualization

Virtualization solves the issue of the CPU that goes to waste on physical servers. Rather than using two servers, you can take one server and create multiple virtual machines on it. Each VM has it’s own operating system, users, and configuration. To enable this, a hypervisor sits on top of the server’s OS to allocate the resources of the server.

While virtualization allows greater utilization of physical hardware, it can require upfront costs in VM software licensing, getting qualified staff and maybe even getting machines that are capable of running VMs, not all are.

Since each VM requires an operating system, there are potentially many operating systems all running on one physical machine, this is solved through containerization.

## Containerization

Containerization is the virtual creation of different isolated environments. They are similar to VMs, but they share ther server’s OS and kernel. This means they’re a bit less segmented, but it also means that they are lighting fast and still make it very easy to switch between environments. Containers wrap applications and their dependencies, standardizing the running environment for the application no matter where the container is.

## Cloud-Based Infrastructure

Cloud based infrastructure is compute and hosting that is available over the internet, typically though a third-party company. This allows for the efficiency of virtualization and for many companies, can bring cost down significantly. Then businesses don’t have to worry about managing physical infrastructure and to deploy and scale without having to worry about buying more machines etc.

Cloud-based may not be as flexible, and companies will have less control. An internet connection is also required, and third-party companies may have access to sensitive data.

Cloud-based still requires a decent amount of configuration and server knowledge, so serverless was introduced.

## Serverless

Serverless is the furthest abstraction from physical infrastructure so far. The most popular type is Functions as a Service (FaaS). This is where a function can be triggered by an event and the function will be executed on space on a server allocated by the third party company. The model charges by compute time. Instead of having an always ready server that is dedicated, you are sharing compute with anyone else using the service.

This means that developers don’t have to worry about configuration of servers or scaling. But, if functions run often prices can climb quickly. There also may be some delay on functions if they haven’t been used for a while. Serverless programs also tend to be more provider specific than other solutions, so moving can be difficult.

If an app has infrequent surges in demand, this might be the way to go.

