# Application Architectures

An application’s architecture is a framework for how it is designed, built and deployed.

## Monolithic Architecture

The entire application and its features are all coded in the same language and live in the same codebase.

### Benefits of Monolithic Architecture

> It is simple.

- Fast Initial development
- Simple Deployment
- Simple Testing

### Drawbacks of Monolithic Architecture

> It doesn’t scale well.

- Single point of failure from interdependent code.
- Inefficient Scaling since parts of the application can’t be changed, the whole instance needs to
- Complex Codebase once it has gotten too large, it’s hard to understand

### Use Cases for Monolithic Architecture

- Small, internal apps
- Initial deployments, with intention to change when the application needs to scale

## N-Tier Architecture

Split an application into several different layers, where each layer has its own responsibility. If this is taken further, by hosting each layer on a dedicated server, this is considered a tier.

MVC is the most popular type of architecture:

- Model - data layer - interactions with the database
- Controller - logic layer - business logic and decision making
- View - presentation layer - what the user sees and interacts with

### Benefits of N-Tier Architecture

> Scales and is more readable.

- Separation of Concerns
- Bettter Scalability

### Drawbacks of N-Tier Architecture

> Complexity

- Several points of failure
- Complex deployment

### Use Cases for N-Tier

- Larger internal applications
- Enterprise applications when other architectures are undesirable

## Microservices Architecture

Instead of having a codebase with the application, each feature is now a service, with its own codebase that is tightly defined. Very granular.

### Benefits of Microservices Architecture

> Resilitient and readable.

- Resistance to Failures
- Superior Scalability
- Diverse Technology
- Smaller Codebases

### Drawbacks of Microservices Architecture

> Slow and complex.

- Slower initial development
- Complex Deployment
- Difficult to test

### Use Cases for Microservices Architecture

There’s really only one: large, enterprise applications.

