# Resiliency

Resiliency is the alibility of a system to continue to perform despite experiencing problems. If we successfully create a resilitent system, it will cause our services to be *highly-available*. Meaning that functionality is accessible to users a vast majority of the time.

## System Threats

### Internal Failures

- Hardware failures
- Firmware going out of date
- hardware support expirations

### External Failures

- API that goes unsupported
- Dependency vulnerabilities or lack of support
- Dependency updates and changes that break integration

### Attack

- DDoS attacks
- SQL Injections

## Methods for Resiliency

To make our systems able to fail, we must reduce the work and spread the work.

### Reduce Workload

#### Input Validation

Handle this somewhere other than the system level to keep bad requests out of the system entirely.

#### Caching

Keep commonly requested results available in fast acting memory so that full requests don’t need to be processed every time.

### Spread the Workload

#### Automatic Scaling

When high traffic is detected, add more servers, and when lower traffic is detected, scaling can move back to only use one.

#### Load Balancing

When servers are added to the pool, something needs to decide which servers get the traffic and handle requests. This is what a load balancer does.

## Measuring Resiliency

### Analysis of Infrastructure

This is the easiest and most inaccurate way to measure. It’s mostly theoretical, but doesn’t benefit from visibility. It is good for a ballbark though.

### Penetration Testing

A controlled exploit of potential security vulnerabilities though attack scenerio simulations. Helps identify security holes in the system.

### Load testing

Replicating situations in which teh system is under heavy loads. Simulation of millions of users attempting to access resources. Can identify the areas where the system will break in real-world conditions.

### Chaos Engineering

Purposeful system failures to see how the system responds to deactivated servers, APIs, storage etc.

## The Real World

The best way to see how an application will perform in the real world is to let it perform in the real world and watch it. We can use monitoring to make sure that we are aware of what causes failures and how to defend against them.

