# SQL, Query Builders, and ORMs

## Managing data with raw SQL of another databse-native querying language

The benefits of using database-native languages to manage the connection of data, are that it is much more direct, and there is less complexity in the way the application works. This makes it easier to maintain, easier to debug and may make it more performant.

The main drawback, is that it is entirely on your shoulders to protect the databse from attackers and users. All inputs need to be santized so that SQL injection is prevented. The database is not abstracted far from the front end, so it is more accessible by malicious actors.

## Managing data with query builders

A query builder is a thin-abstraction from using raw database langue. This will automate the sanitation process and for those who are familiar with the databse langage and structure, much of the syntax will be similar.

This makes it difficult to use for those that aren’t familiar with the database hower, there is not enough abstraction provided, and then a developer may have to learn the database language as well as the specific query builder syntax. Since the builder is also emulating the languge in most cases, some functionality may be unusable, limiting the developers.

## Managing Data with ORMs

An object relational mapper, or an ORM, is software dedicated to translating between the data representations in a relational databse and the representation in memory used with object-oriented programming.

ORMs can be useful abstractions that make working with databases a lot easier. They can help you design and iterate quickly and bridge the conceptual differences between the application logic and database structures. However, many of these advantages act as a double-edged sword. They can prevent you from understanding your databases and can make it challenging to debug, change paradigms, or increase performance.

