# PostgreSQL Contraints

## Introduction

To keep our data secure and clean, we can use *constraints* on our data. These constraints can reject `INSERT` s and throw errors to make debugging easier.

## PostgreSQL Data Types

Specifying data types for your columns is required syntax in Postgres, and it is the most basic form of adding constraints to a column.

Here is a full list of the data types from the [PostgreSQL documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/10/datatype.html).

Data types are incomplete when it comes to validating information however, they are not specific enough to specify the formatting and the types of data that need to be received into certain rows.

Using data types alone to constrain your data is also problematic because PostgreSQL will type cast, meaning that it will try to interpret your data as the type it needs to be. (i.e. turning 1.5 into 2 when it's in an integer column.)

## Nullability Constraints

To keep records from being `INSERT` ed, use the `NOT NULL` constraint when creating the table.

```sql
CREATE TABLE talks (
    id integer,
    title varchar NOT NULL,
    speaker_id integer NOT NULL,
    estimated_length integer,
    session_timeslot timestamp NOT NULL
);
```

Now if tables are aggregated, or an `INSERT` statement is used and there are no values for the `title` , `sepaker_id` or `session_timeslot` columns, an error will be returned, and the statement rejected.

## Improving Tables with Constraints

When you need to go back to change the schema or the constraints of a table, use `ALTER TABLE` .

```sql
-- Add a constraint.
ALTER TABLE talks
ALTER COLUMN session_timeslot SET NOT NULL;

-- Delete a constraint.
ALTER TABLE talks
ALTER COLUMN session_timeslot DROP NOT NULL;
```

If you try to add a constraint to an existing data set that has data that violates that constraint, then PostgreSQL will throw an error.

In this case, data will probably need to be *backfilled*, a term used to describe the updating of old data. One of the ways this can be done is by inserting a placeholder value that satisfies the constraints condition.

```sql
-- Backfilling data.
UPDATE talks
SET title = "TBD"
WHERE title IS NULL;

-- Continue to add constraints...
```

## Introduction to Check Constraints

To validate conditions that are not just data-type-specific, or null checking, use a `CHECK` statement. These will use true and false logic to *check* the validity of an piece of data for a row.

These can be added in `CREATE TABLE` statements, or after the table is created in an `ALTER TABLE` .

```sql
-- Create table syntax
CREATE TABLE people (
  id integer NOT NULL UNIQUE CHECK (id > 19)
  ...
);

-- Alter table syntax
ALTER TABLE people
ADD CHECK (id > 19);
```

## Check Constraints Continued

Check constraints can take the gamut of SL logical syntax:

   - `AND` and `OR`
   - `IN`
   - `LIKE`
   - Comparisons between columns

```sql
ALTER TABLE talks
ADD CHECK (estimated_length > 0 AND estimated_length < 120);
```

To apply constraints to multiple columns, use the following syntax

```sql
ALTER TABLE talks
ADD CHECK (estimated_length < 120 AND date_part('year', session_timeslot) = 2020);
```

## Using Unique Constraints

Add unique constraints to your tables, it makes it easier to assign a primary key, makes it easier to pull

```sql
-- Using CREATE TABLE
CREATE TABLE attendees (
  email varchar unique
  ...
  UNIQUE (room_number, time_slot)
);

-- Using ALTER TABLE
ALTER TABLE attendees
ADD UNIQUE (email, id);
```

## Introduction to Primary Keys

A primary key is a non-null value that uniquely identifies a record of information. This is a special constraint that is used to define relationships between tables.

Primary keys are automatically applied with the `UNIQUE` and `NOT NULL` constraints.

```sql
-- CREATE TABLE
CREATE TABLE customers (
  id PRIMARY KEY,
  ...
);

-- Alter Table
ALTER TABLE customers
ADD PRIMARY KEY (id);
```

## Introduction to Foreign Keys

Foreign keys are the presence of another table's primary key in a different or foreign table. This defines relationships between data.

Values inserted into a *child table* must be validated by the data that is already in the *parent table*. The property that ensure that data is validated by referencing another table in the model is called *referential integrity.* Which can be enforced by adding a `FOREIGN KEY` on the child table.

```sql
ALTER TABLE registrations
ADD FOREIGN KEY (talk_id)
REFERENCES talks (id);
```

## Foreign Keys - Cascading Changes

The foreign key constraint prevents the deletion or updating of a row of a parent table that is referenced by some child table.

You could explicitly set this behavior on `CREATE TABLE` with `REFERENCES talks (id) ON DELETE RESTRICT` or, replace DELETE with UPDATE.

You can also set UPDATEs and DELETEs to automatically `CASCADE` . Which will apply updates and deletions to the children.

```sql
ALTER TABLE registrations
ADD FOREIGN KEY (talk_id)
REFERENCES talks (id) ON DELETE CASCADE;
```

Now, if a `talks.id` value is removed, any other row that references that value will also be removed.

## Additional Resources

[5.3. Constraints](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/10/ddl-constraints.html)

