# PostgreSQL Database Maintenance

## Understanding Object Size

In order to measure disk utilization, you can use the following functions:

- `pg_total_relation_size` - returns the size of the table and indexes in bytes (usually in millions and billions
- `pg_table_size` and `pg_indexes_size` returns the size of the table's data and the indexes, if you sum these you will get the above
- `pg_size_pretty` can be used with the above functions to format a number as KB, MB or GB

```sql
SELECT 
  pg_size_pretty(pg_table_size('time_series')) AS tbl_size,
  pg_size_pretty(pg_indexes_size('time_series')) AS idx_size,
  pg_size_pretty(pg_total_relation_size('time_series')) AS total_size;
```

You can also call `pg_total_relation_size` on the name of an index, since it is a relation and get the total size of the index.

## Updates and Table Size

In PostgreSQL, each row is a file that is stored on the disk. When `UPDATE` and `DELETE` operations are formed, the old documents are not removed. In both cases, the old document is marked as invalid and it will not be returned by user queries. They, however, are still there.

So an `UPDATE` statement, doesn't actually overwrite the row. It creates a new row, with changes from the old one, and it marks the old one as invalid.

This means that if we `UPDATE` or `DELETE` a significant portion of the database, we will not probably reduce the disk usage of the database.

## Introduction to VACUUM

To manage the dead tuples that pile up in the database, use a `VACUUM` . Use it with the name of a table to specify which table to vacuum, or without argument to vacuum the whole database.

`VACUUM` clears dead tuples where possible, meaning it may not actually remove any of them. When it cannot remove a dead tuple, PostgreSQL marks those tuples for overwriting when new data is added.

```sql
VACUUM table_name;
```

## Analyze and Autovacuum

PostgreSQL will automatically run `autovacuum` which is a `VACUUM` command and an `ANALYZE` command. You could also do this manually.

To see information about how Postgres does this:

```sql
SELECT relname, 
    last_vacuum,
    last_autovacuum, 
    last_analyze
FROM pg_stat_all_tables 
WHERE relname = 'books';
```

## Deletes and Table Size

`DELETE` s create dead tuples, leaving the database the same size as it was before. To see how much of your disk space is take up by the dead tuples, vs the live tuples, query the ``pg_stat_all_tables` .

```sql
SELECT schemaname, relname, n_dead_tup, n_live_tup
FROM pg_stat_all_tables;
```

You may need to run an `ANALYZE <table_name>` to get more accurate statistics for the `pg_stat_all_tables` table.

## Vacuum Full

Instead of `VACUUM` you can use `VACUUM FULL` which will rewirte all of the data from the table, minus any dead tuples, to a new location on the disk. Then Postgres can full clear the space that was occupied by the table. This will do more to clear up space, but the operation is heavier and can block reading and writing operations on the table.

## Truncate

There will come times where all of the rows will need to be cleared from a database, use `TRUNCATE` for this. These two examples are functionally equivalent, however, `TRUNCATE` uses less system resources and does not scan every record.

```sql
DELETE * FROM table_name WHERE true;
VACUUM FULL rand;
```

```sql
TRUNCATE table_name;
```

