# PostgreSQL Roles: Database Security

## Introduction to Database Permissions

In a new database server, one database and one user are automatically created, usually called `postgres` .

To see the name of the current user, run `SELECT current_user;` .

The `postgres` user is a `superuser` , meaning that the user has access and permissions to perform all operations and actions.

## Investigating Superuser Permissions

To check permissions of users in the database, query:

   - `pg_catalog.pg_roles` - all users and a description of special permissions
   - `infromation_schema.table_privileges` - description of a user's, `grantee` , permissions on a table - who can perform what operations on a table

```sql
SELECT grantor, grantee, table_schema, table_name, privilege_type
FROM information_schema.table_privileges 
WHERE grantee = 'userB';
```

A `superuser` can mimic a different set of permissions by `SET ROLE <test role>` .

## Creating and Modifying Database Roles

PostgreSQL has *login roles* and *group roles* that can both be created and edited by a `superuser` .

- Login roles - for routine activity
- Group roles - hold other roles as members and allow permissions access

To create a role, use `CREATE ROLE` with arguments to modify permissions.

To change an existing role, use `ALTER ROLE` .

```sql
-- Create a new role
CREATE ROLE sampleusr WITH NOSUPERUSER LOGIN;

-- Edit a role
ALTER ROLE miriam WITH CREATEDB
```

The permissions that can be assigned with `CREATE ROLE` are:

- `SUPERUSER`
- `CREATEROLE`
- `CREATEDB`
- `LOGIN` - able to login?
- `IN ROLE` - list of existing roles that this role will be added to as new member

Older syntax includes `CREATE USER` which implies the `LOGIN` permission. But, this is older and is probably better to use `CREATE ROLE` .

## Modifying Permissions on Existing Schemas and Tables

Every schema and table has an owner, that owner is responsible for allowing or revoking rights for other users to interact with and edit the information on that table.

To add permissions to a user:

```sql
GRANT USAGE, CREATE ON SCHEMA finance TO analyst;

-- then table specific
GRANT SELECT, UPDATE ON finance.revenue TO analyst;
```

To remove permissions:

```sql
REVOKE UPDATE ON finance.revenue FROM analyst;
```

Permissions that must be granted or revoked are:

   `USAGE` - must be granted on a table's schema to interact with a table

   `CREATE` `DROP` - add and remove tables in a schema

   `SELECT` `UDPATE` `DELETE` `INSERT` - for individual tables within the schema

## Modifying Default Permissions

To set permissions for new objects in a schema, set or modify the default permissions.

```sql
GRANT USAGE ON finance TO analyst;

GRANT SELECT ON ALL TABLES IN finance TO analyst;
```

This keeps the superuser from having to grant permissions uniquely each time a new table is created.

```sql
ALTER DEFAULT PRIVILEGES IN SCHEMA finance
GRANT SELECT ON TABLES TO analyst;
```

To set permissions at the database level, ise `IN DATABASE` instead of `IN SCHEMA` .

This doesn't apply to all SQL DBMSs.

## Groups and Inheritance

To manage large groups of users, but few user types, you can create groups with specified permissions that you can add people to. The group owns the permissions, and the user account will inherit those permissions once added to the group.

Powerful permissions like `LOGIN` `SUPERUSER` `CREATEDB` `CREATEROLE` cannot be inherited to prevent the accidental sharing of high level permissions.

Create a group role by using `CREATE ROLE` and `WITH ROLE` to enumerate the users:

```sql
CREATE ROLE marketing WITH NOLOGIN ROLE alice, bob;
```

Create a group role by using `CREATE ROLE` and `GRANT` to add the permissions to listed names:

```sql
CREATE ROLE finance WITH NOLOGIN;
GRANT finance TO charlie;
```

Add users to groups on creation by specifying `IN ROLE` with the `CREATE ROLE` statement.

```sql
CREATE ROLE fran WITH LOGIN IN ROLE employees, managers;
```

## Column Level Security

To set column level permissions to users, use a `GRANT` statement, and identify the columns.

```sql
GRANT SELECT (project_code, project_name, project_status)
ON projects TO employees;
```

## Row Level Security

There are instances where records should not be accessible to certain users, though they should have access to the table. To create row level securiy, a policy must be created.

```sql
CREATE POLICY emp_rls_policy ON accounts FOR SELECT
TO sales USING (salesperson=current_user);
```

The `USING` statement is a condition that must be fulfilled to allow permissions to be granted.

We must also enable the policy:

```sql
ALTER TABLE acounts ENABLE ROW LEVEL SECURITY;
```

