# Introduction to Indexes

## What is an Index?

Since databases often store massive amounts of information, we use indexes. An index is an organization of the data in the table that improves querying performance and helps us use the information efficiently. A database can have any number of indexes, including none!

To view the indexes in a database, use the `pg_Indexes` table:

```sql
SELECT *
FROM pg_Indexes
WHERE tablename = 'products';
```

## What is the Benefit of An Index?

Indexing allows for Binary Tree or B-Tree searching. This is the alternative to having the database have to search every record in the database for matches. Instead of checking each and every record, the database will start in the middle and ask "Is the value of what I'm looking for higher or lower?" Then it will go to the selected half, and perform the same operation.

With this method, a database of 1,000,000 records can be filtered down, worst case, in 20 comparison operations, rather than 1,000,000.

To perform a binary tree operation, however, the database must be indexed.

## Impact of Indexes

To investigate a query plan and see how PostgreSQL is going to break down your command into runnable parts:

```sql
EXPLAIN ANALYZE SELECT *
FROM customers;
```

[Documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-explain.html) on EXPLAIN from PostgreSQL website.

This query will return whether Postgres will `Seq Scan` or, Sequential Scan: reading every record to find matches, or `Index` .

This query will also tell you "Planning Time" and "Execution Time" - How long it will take for the query to be translated into tasks, and how long it will take to execute.

## How to Build an Index

To create an index on a table column, use `CREATE INDEX` with the name of the index and the name of the table and column.

```sql
CREATE INDEX customer_username_idx
ON customers (username);
```

## Index Filtering

When queries begin to get more complex, using `WHERE` , `JOIN` , and other filtering methods, PostgreSQL will have to decide whether or not to use your index. All of the iterations that it goes through with each query determines what the best way to complete your request is.

Indexes will make things much faster, but with complex querying, they might not always be used.

## Multicolumn Indexes

To add multiple columns to the index, which can further optimize searching, include multiple columns in the `CREATE INDEX` statement. Note: The index will be applied in the order of inclusion in the statement.

```sql
CREATE INDEX customer_name_idx
ON customers (first_name, last_name);
```

Multicolumn indexes are also referred to commonly as Composite or Compound Indexes.

## Drop an Index

To remove an index you have created, use `DROP INDEX` .

```sql
DROP INDEX IF EXISTS customers_city_idx;
```

## Why not Index Every Column?

If we only needed to access records in a database, then we should index all of them. It greatly speeds up the process. But, the cost to this is that any editing: `DELETE` `INSERT` and `UPDATE` statements now become harder to do.

If a record is entered, edited or removed from a table with indexing, the organization of the index may change. This means that not only does the affected record need updated, but so does the index for any affected record. This can cause significant cost to the system, so it's best sometimes to remove an index to insert a great deal of data.

Indexes also take up space, and if we were to index an entire database, every column, we would likely double the size of the database. When this happens at scale it can be costly.

To see the size of a table in the database, query the following table:

```sql
SELECT pg_size_pretty (pg_total_relation_size('customers'));
```

## When Should I Add An Index?

This is a balancing of advantages and disadvantages. Some things you can think about are:

Is this database added to and updated regularly? Or is it more often searched?

How large are the search queries? If we are regularly pulling over half of a table, then the advantages of indexing are almost nonexistent.

