# Intermediate Indexes

## Partial Index

There are times where you will only want to add indexing to a subset of a table. We will do this with the `CREATE INDEX` syntax, combined with a `WHERE` clause. For example:

```sql
CREATE INDEX users_user_name_internal_idx ON users (user_name)
WHERE email_address LIKE '%@wellsfargo.com';
```

The filtering does not have to occur on a column that is part of your index.

## Order By

By default, an index will be ordered by PostgreSQL in ascending order with NULLs last, but if you want to change that, add this to your `CREATE INDEX` query.

```sql
CREATE INDEX logins_date_time_idx
ON logins (date_time DESC, user_name);
```

You can change the position of NULL values by adding `NULLS FIRST` or `NULLS LAST` .

## Primary Keys and Indexes

A primary key already creates a unique index for any column that it is specified on. This, like the primary key and the unique constraint will reject any records that have the same value.

The index is already created when a private key is specified, and can be seein by querying pg_Indexes.

## Clustered Index

A clustered index is often tied to the table’s primary key, physically organizing the data into a table structure to create better search times.

Even in a clustered Index, PostgreSQL will not reindex altered or inserted data automatically. You will have to “recluster” it yourslef:

```sql
CLUSTER products USING products_product_name_idx;
```

If you have already specified which index to cluster on:

```sql
CLUSTER products;
```

Or you want to cluster the whoe database:

```sql
CLUSTER
```

## Non-Clustered Index

Only one index can be clustered in a database, the rest are non-clustered. The difference is that, wehre a clustered index, orders all of the records in the table according to the index, a non-clustered index, will order the columns and then peform a second search of the associated information returned from the initial query.

For now, the main take away is that a clustered index contains all the information in your table and physically reorganizes the way it is stored in memory. A non-clustered index creates a key on the columns you indicate and a pointer back to the main table for any columns not part of the index.

## Index-Only Scans

To keep PostgreSQL from doing lookbacks on a non-clustered index, you would have to make sure that you are only calling indexed columns.

Be aware that once you add a column that is not indexed, the lookback will cause more system resources and time to be necessecary.

## Combining Indexes

The server can automatically combine two single column indexes to marginally speed the search. But a multicolumn index is faster, than combining. However, a single column index is faster than a multicolumn in general.

You could create two singles and a multi, and the server will pick the fastest one, but if you don’t use all of them often, its best to pick the one with the better use case.

## Indexes Based On Expressions

```sql
CREATE UNIQUE INDEX unique_manufacture_company_name_idx ON manufacture(LOWER(company_name));
```

- Adds a UNIQUE constraint to the index, and forces lowercase on the company_name field to make sure we don't wind up with differently formatted duplicates.

