# Seek vs. Scan

For most queries that a database performs, a some sort of search will have to be performed. There are two primary forms of this, a seek and a scan.

A **scan** searches every record in the database table/view. A **seek** uses an index to find the specific record that is being requested, essentially allowing the database to jump to the predefined record.

## When does a server decide to use one over the other?

In general, if you're querying a small subset of data on an indexed column, the database will **seek**, however, if you are querying large amounts of data, or you are querying an unindexed column, the database will **scan**.

This decision happens in the preprocessing of the query. A choice is made based on the best-guess of what it thinks will be the fastest.

## What can you do?

To take advantage of the different ways a database searches, you must write your queries and organize your data accordingly. Index commonly searched columns, and places where you need to find small amounts of data from large datasets to take advantage of the seeking functionality.

A database will not be able to seek unless there is some index that the database can read.

## Tip for speeding up queries

If you're querying the same set of data multiple times in a block, save the columns to an object like a temporary table

```sql
CREATE TEMP TABLE myTemp(first_name VARCHAR(100), last_name VARCHAR(100), book_id INTEGER);

INSERT INTO myTemp (first_name, last_name, book_id)
SELECT
    c.first_name,
    c.last_name,
    o.book_id
FROM customers    AS c
INNER JOIN orders    AS o    ON o.customer_id = c.customer_id
WHERE c.state_name = 'Texas';

SELECT
    m.first_name,
    m.last_name,
    b.title,
    b.original_language
FROM myTemp    AS m
INNER JOIN books    AS b    ON b.book_id = m.book_id
    AND b.original_language = 'Czech';
    
SELECT
    m.first_name,
    m.last_name,
    b.title,
    b.original_language
FROM myTemp    AS m
INNER JOIN books    AS b    ON b.book_id = m.book_id
    AND b.first_published  < 1990;

        
DROP TABLE myTemp;
```

