# Academic Normalization

## A 1NF Database

The *1 Normal Form* database is also known as an *atomic* database. This database has the following characteristics:

- each cell contains only one value
- each row is unique

Atomic refers to the fact that the data cannot be divided any more, like an atom.

## A 2NF Database

The *2 Normal Form* database means that a database has all the characteristics of a 1NF database, but additionally it does not contain any *partial dependencies*.

A partial dependency is when an attribute depends on a part of the table's primary key rather than the whole primary key. For example, in a db that listed books and their authors, if the table contained an author id, *and* a book id, these would both be considered partial dependencies. They only *partially* describe what the record is truly about.

## A 3NF Database

A 3NF is a database with all the characteristics of a 2NF database, but also has no transitive functional dependencies.

A *transitive functional dependency* is a non-prime attribute that depends on another non-prime attribute rather than a primary key or prime attribute.

I don't really understand this to be honest. It has something to do with not utilizing "superkeys" that identify disparate types of information. So, the example provided in the article refers to the address of an author being stored on the author table. To take this from 2NF to 3NF, the address information would have to be separated into an Addresses table with it's own primary key.

I think this is essentially saying that since the address of an author could change, if we wanted to record all of the addresses that have ever been sent to, that we would have a deletion anomaly if the author was removed from the collection.

