# Introduction to Deployment

Deployment is the process of making software available to people other than the developer! It’s exposing the software for public use, or for use by the restricted set of consumers. It is moving from development to production.

Before the Internet, deployment was physical distribution of software on CD-ROMs that had to be installed locally on a user’s computer to be executed, but now we have other options.

## Deployment in the Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC)

The typical phases of SDLC:

1. Planning - Defining the problem and objectives/requirements fo the software
2. Defining/Analysis - Any additional resources needed and research for how to run a prototype
3. Design - Technical details and specifications
4. Development/Implementation - Code is built and written to meet the spec
5. Testing/Integration - Confirm that components work and work together, catching bugs
6. Deployment - A version is packaged and shipped either to another team or users
7. Maintenance - bug fixes, continued development of new features

Each of these processes can be broken down, and the breakdown of deployment is no different.

## Typical Deployment Process

Code is typically deployed in multiple environemnts. Some of the most important are, the *local development environment*, which is where the code is written and initially tested. Then there is the *staging environment*, which is a production-like environment that is used for testing. Finally, there's *production* which is where the software is deployed to be used by actual users!

So, the SDLC is not as linear as it seems above, typically some deployment wil have to take place between the Development and Testing phases, so that non-development teams can get access to the software to test. Once code has been tested in staging, it is deployed into production. The deployment into production is typically referred to as the **software release**.

Most teams will automate software deployment using tools like Render, AWS, or Google Cloud that handle the moving of software between environments.

