# Introduction to Deployment with Render

Recently, there has been a move to the cloud for deployment solutions. This means that developers or development teams don’t have to own and manage the infastructure that serves the content. Here we’re exploring how one service, Render, handles cloud-based deployment.

## Platform as a Service (PaaS)

PaaS is a cloud-based deployment solution, where a company will provide an all-in-one platform for building, deploying and managing application on the internet. They typically offer an easy-to-use interface and chage per-usage, but some offer free teirs that limit resources.

This has the following benefits:

- provider handles the building and running of the code
- provider may offer databases or other resources that can be integrated with the product
- provider will ugrade and maintain the infrastructure
- provider will handle *some* of the security aspects of the infrastructure
- it may be easier to scale automatically with a provider

## Introduction to Render

Render is a PaaS platform that will host applications from code that it pulls from GitHub. Imagine a full-stack web app that is running on an express back-end that connects to a PostgreSQL database. We could connect that application to Render and the run the PSQL databse as a service on the Render servers to deploy our application. Render will then provide a url that the front-end will be accessible from.

By default Auto Deploy is enabled, which means that if we push to the main branch on our GitHub repo, the web app will be simultaneously updated.

