# Binary Search

A binary search is a method of locating elements without having to iterate the entire list. This brings our runtime from `O(n)` to `O(log n)` . This can be implemented using a specialized tree structure, called a binary search tree, where each parent can only have two nodes, and the left node must be less than the right node.

Binary search hinges on having a sorted dataset. The basic method is:

- Check the middle value
- If the value is higher than the target, look at the top half
- If the value is lower than the target, look at the lower half
- Continue dividing until the list cannot be divided and iterate if necessecary.

Since each search iteration cuts the dataset in half, we are looking at a logarithmic time complexity.

## Implementing Binary Search in an Array

```javascript
const binarySearch = (arr, target) => {
  let left = 0
  let right = arr.length

  while (left < right) {
    const indexToCheck = Math.floor((left + right) / 2)
    const checking = arr[indexToCheck];

    if (checking === target) {
      return indexToCheck
    } else if (checking > target) {
      left = indexToCheck + 1;
    } else {
      right = indexToCheck;
    }
    return null;
  }
}
```

## Implementing Binary Search Trees

A binary tree has an `O(log N)` runtime for data retrieval which makes it ideal for the operation. The specialized tree has nodes that contain the following properties:

- data
- a depth value (1 is the top)
- a left pointer to a child
   - The child is also a specialized node
   - This pointer must have data that is less than it’s own data
- a right pointer to a child
   - The child is also a specilized node
   - This point must have data that is greated than it’s own data

```javascript
class BinaryTree {
  constructor(value, depth = 1) {
    this.value = value
    this.depth = depth
    this.left = null;
    this.right = null;
  }

  insert(value) {
    if (value < this.value) {
      if (!this.left) {
        this.left = new BinaryTree(value, this.depth+1);
      } else {
        this.left.insert(value);
      }
    } else {
      if (!this.right) {
        this.right = new BinaryTree(value, this.depth+1);
      } else {
        this.right.insert(value);
      }
    }
  }

  getNodeByValue(value) {
    if (this.value === value) {
      return this;
    } else if (this.left && value < this.value) {
      return this.left.getNodeByValue(value);
    } else if (this.right && value > this.value) {
      return this.right.getNodeByValue(value);
    } else {
      return null;
    }
  }

  depthFirstTraversal() {
    if (this.left) {
      this.left.depthFirstTraversal();
    } 
    console.log(`Depth=${this.depth}, Value=${this.value}`);
    if (this.right) {
      this.right.depthFirstTraversal();
    }
  }
};

module.exports = BinaryTree
```

## Traversing a Binary Tree

We can traverse a binary tree breadth-first, or depth-first. This will work the same as we did with a reglar tree.

There are three traversal options though in a binary tree with depth-first traversal:

- *Preorder*, when we perform an action on the current node first, followed by its left child node and its right child node
   - current > left > right
- *Inorder*, when we perform an action on the left child node first, followed by the current node and right child node
   - left > current > right
- *Postorder*, when we perform an action on the left child node first, followed by the right child node and then the current node
   - left > right > current

We will implement an *inorder*, since, when we traverse and list out the values, we will get an ordered list of values. When we traverse in this way, we will produce a list that is entirely sorted in order.

See above for the implementation as `depthFirstTraversal()`

